Substations would be connected to one another via substation interarray cables. Up to two interarray cables would be buried beneath the seabed floor. Up to two offshore export cables would be buried under the seabed floor within the two offshore export cable route corridors to connect the proposed wind energy facility to the onshore electrical grid. Up to two offshore export cables would make landfall and deliver electrical power to the EW 1 substation (Brooklyn, New York) and EW 2 substation (Oceanside or Island Park, New York). The submarine export cable route for the EW 1 substation would depart the Lease Area along the Lease Area's northern boundary, continue north-northwest across the outbound lane of the Ambrose to Nantucket TSS, and then enter the Separation Zone between the traffic lanes before turning to the west. The submarine export cable route for the EW 1 substation would continue through the Traffic Separation Zone toward New York Harbor, reaching a Precautionary Area at the end of the traffic lanes. Prior to reaching the Precautionary Area, the submarine export cable route for the EW 1 substation would enter a charted Danger Area and Empire has proposed an alternate route variant to traverse this section of the submarine export cable route for the EW 1 substation. Approaching Gravesend Bay, Empire has proposed route variants for the EW 1 submarine export cable that would either route the EW 1 submarine export cable within the maintained Ambrose Channel or through the charted Anchorage #25 area. North of the Anchorage #25 area, the EW 1 route would then turn to the northeast and follow the Bay Ridge Channel to the EW 1 landfall at SBMT. The EW 2 submarine export cable route corridor would exit the Lease Area from the central north edge and travel in a relatively straight, northwestern direction, then turn west seaward of the New York state water boundary before making landfall in the vicinity of 2 BOEM also included Shinnecock Indian Nation as an invited signatory on this Programmatic Agreement, but the tribal nation declined to sign the agreement.

Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP Long Beach or Lido Beach in one of four locations, to be selected from the following sites: EW 2 Landfall A (Riverside Boulevard), EW 2 Landfall B (Monroe Boulevard), EW 2 Landfall C (Lido Beach West Town Park), or EW 2 Landfall E (Laurelton Boulevard). Landfall locations in Brooklyn, Long Beach, or Lido Beach, New York would include transition joint bays to connect the offshore export cable to the onshore export cable. Transition of the export cables from offshore to onshore would be accomplished by using open-cut trenching or trenchless methods. Onshore export cables would be buried and housed within a single duct bank buried along the onshore export cable route with a target burial of 4 feet. The onshore export cable routes would terminate at the EW 1 substation and EW 2 substation sites. The proposed Projects have a designed life span of approximately 35 years; some installations and components may remain fit for continued service after this time. O&M activities would include inspections, preventative maintenance, and, as needed, corrective maintenance for onshore substations, onshore export cables, and grid connections. Empire would conduct annual maintenance of WTGs, including safety surveys, blade maintenance, painting, and replacement of consumable items, such as filters and hydraulic oils, as needed. Foundation inspections would be conducted every 3 years starting on year three. Surveys of the submarine export cable and interarray cables would be completed annually for the first 3 years, then every 2 years to confirm the cables have not become exposed. The offshore export cables, interarray cables, and OSS interconnector cables typically have no maintenance requirements unless a failure occurs. Empire would need to use vessels, vehicles, and aircraft during O&M activities described above. Although the proposed Projects are anticipated to have an operational life of 35 years, it is possible that some installations and components may remain fit for continued service after this time. Empire would have to apply for and be granted an extension if Empire wanted to operate the proposed Projects for more than the 25-year operations term stated in Empire's lease. The process of decommissioning would remove all facilities, projects, cables, pipelines, and obstructions and clear the seafloor of all obstructions created by the proposed Projects. All foundations would need to be removed 15 feet (4.6 meters) below the mudline (30 CFR 585.910(a)). Absent permission from BOEM, Empire would have to achieve complete decommissioning within 2 years of termination of the lease and either reuse, recycle, or responsibly dispose of all materials removed. A Section 106 review would be conducted at the decommissioning stage. Connected action improvements would upgrade SBMT to enable SBMT to serve as a staging facility and O&M facility for the offshore wind industry. In the near term, SBMT would be used to support EW 1 and EW 2, and SBMT is expected to support other offshore wind developers and projects in the future. Planned improvements include dredging to allow vessels laden with WTG components access to piers; bulkhead improvements to support large cranes for handling WTG components; additional wharves to allow mooring and berthing of barges, service operation vessels, and crew transport vessels; and construction of an O&M facility (NYCEDC 2021). Undertaking BOEM has determined that the Projects and connected action constitute an undertaking subject to Section 106 of the NHPA as amended (54 USC 306108) and BOEM's implementing regulations (36 CFR 800), and the Project activities proposed under the COP (Empire 2022) and connected action activities proposed in the USACE/NYSDEC joint permit application (NYCEDC 2021) have the potential to affect historic properties. Confidential appendices to the COP referenced in this document were sent electronically or by mail depending on expressed preference to all consulting parties on November 18, 2022. The COP, as well as the COP's public and confidential appendices, and the USACE/NYSDEC joint permit application are hereby incorporated by reference.

Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP The undertaking for this Section 106 review includes the Proposed Action and connected action. As described in Section 2.1.2 of the Draft EIS, the Proposed Action would include the construction, O&M, and eventual decommissioning of EW 1 and EW 2 within the range of design parameters described in Volume 1 of the COP (Empire 2022) and summarized in Appendix E, Project Design Envelope and Maximum-Case Scenario, subject to applicable mitigation measures. The connected action would include planned improvements at SBMT to enable SBMT to serve as a staging facility and O&M facility for EW 1 and EW 2 and other offshore wind projects as also described in Section 2.1.2 of the Draft EIS. Area of Potential Effects BOEM defines the APE for approval of the COP to include the following geographic areas: cent The depth and breadth of the seabed potentially affected by any bottom-disturbing activities, constituting the marine archaeological resources portion of the APE; cent The depth and breadth of terrestrial areas potentially affected by any ground disturbing activities, constituting the terrestrial archaeological resources portion of the APE; cent The viewshed from which renewable energy structures, whether offshore or onshore, would be visible, constituting the visual portion of the APE; and cent Any temporary or permanent construction or staging areas, both onshore and offshore, which may fall into any of the above portions of the APE. These are described below in greater detail with respect to the proposed activities, consistent with BOEM's Guidelines for Providing Archaeological and Historic Property Information Pursuant to 30 CFR Part 585 (BOEM 2020).

Proposed Action Marine Archaeological Resources APE The marine archaeological resources portion of the APE (hereafter marine APE) for the Projects is the depth and breadth of the seabed potentially affected by any bottom-disturbing activities and temporary or permanent offshore construction or staging areas. The marine archaeological resources portion of the APE includes a conservative PDE that can accommodate a number of potential designs, whether monopile or jacketed foundations are used, installed by jack-up vessels as well as necessary support vessels and barges. The marine archaeological resources portion of the APE encompasses activities within the Lease Area (Attachment B, Figure 1), within EW 1 and EW 2 submarine export cable routes (Attachment B, Figure 2 and Figure 3), and within the connected action (Attachment B, Figure 4; see more detail about the connected action). The Lease Area encompasses 79,350 acres (32,112 hectares) with water depths ranging from 79 to 141 feet (23 to 41 meters). Within the Lease Area, the Wind Farm Development Area would occur in a smaller footprint of 65,458 acres (26,490 hectares), approximately 83 percent of the Lease Area. Empire proposes up to 147 WTGs and up to two OSS within the extent of the PDE. The marine archaeological resources portion of the APE also includes all offshore areas where seafloor-disturbing activities from interarray cable trenching and installation, boulder relocation, and vessel anchoring may occur. The maximum vertical seabed impact would be approximately 180 feet (55 meters) for WTGs, and approximately 295 feet (90 meters) for OSS. The array and substation interconnector cables have a target burial depth of 8 feet (2.4 meters) below the stable seabed. Seafloor disturbance for anchoring of construction vessels would be approximately 20 feet (6.1 meters) and within the anchor corridors would be 49 feet (15 meters). Each main vessel would have up to eight anchors.

Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP The marine APE also includes offshore export cable corridors extending from the Lease Area to the sea-to-shore transition at landfall locations in Brooklyn, Long Beach, or Lido Beach, New York. The submarine export cable routes contain two separate corridors: siting and anchor. The siting corridors would vary in width between 500 feet (152 meters) (EW 1) and 900 feet (274 meters) (EW 2), while both export cable route anchor corridors measure 1,250 feet (381 meters) wide. The EW 1 submarine export cable route would be approximately 40 nm (74 kilometers) and approximately 8,158 acres (3,301 hectares), extending northwest from the EW 1 OSS to the sea-to-shore transition at a landfall location in Brooklyn; and EW 2 submarine export cable route extending north from the EW 2 OSS to the sea-to-shore transition at a landfall location in Long Beach. The EW 2 submarine export cable route would be approximately 26 nm (48 kilometers) and approximately 12,169 acres (4,925 hectares), extending north from the EW 2 OSS to the sea-to-shore transition at a selected landfall location in Long Beach or Lido Beach. Offshore export cables would typically be buried below the seabed similarly to the array cables. It is assumed most would be buried at shallow depths of 8 feet (2.4 meters) and none will exceed burial depths of 20 feet (5.5 meters).

Terrestrial Archaeological Resources APE The terrestrial archaeological resources portion of the APE (hereafter terrestrial APE) includes areas of potential ground disturbance associated with the onshore construction and operation of the Projects. The terrestrial archaeological resources portion of the APE is presented as a conservative PDE and includes the cable landfall sites, underground cable routes, onshore interconnection cables, onshore substations, and an O&M facility. The depth and breadth of potential ground-disturbing activities are described below for each location. Attachment B, Figure 5, depicts the terrestrial archaeological resources portion of the APE for onshore cable and landfall site alternatives for the EW 1 onshore export and interconnection cable corridor, onshore substation, and O&M facility in detail. Attachment B, Figure 6, depicts the terrestrial archaeological resources portion of the APE for EW 2 onshore export and interconnection cable corridor and onshore substation options. The terrestrial archaeological resources portion of the APE includes the sea-to-shore transition landfall sites. Transition of the export cables from offshore to onshore would be accomplished by using both trenchless (e.g., HDD and jack and bore) and trenched (open-cut trench) methods. For the EW 1 landfall location, trenchless methods (i.e., HDD) may require a maximum vertical disturbance of up to 10 feet (3 meters) in a 200-foot by 200-foot (61-meter by 61-meter) area. For the EW 2 landfall location, trenchless methods (i.e., HDD) may require a maximum vertical disturbance of up to 10 feet (3 meters) in a 260-foot by 680-foot (79-meter by 207-meter) area. Ground-disturbing activities from installation of the onshore interconnection cable and associated excavation would occur at the EW 1 landfall site illustrated in Attachment B, Figure 5, and ground-disturbing activities from installation and associated excavation for the onshore export cables and interconnection cables would occur at EW 2 landfall sites options illustrated in Attachment B, Figure 6. The onshore export and interconnection cables would be installed underground on road shoulders, sidewalks, parking areas, or within transit and utility easements. The onshore export and interconnection cables would be installed utilizing trenched (i.e., open-cut trenching) and trenchless methods. EW 1 cables would measure up to 0.2 mile (0.4 kilometer) in length. Open-cut trenches would measure up to 10 feet (3 meters) in depth and 10 feet (3 meters) in width with a construction corridor width of 50 feet (15 meters) and operational corridor width of 25 feet (8 meters) for interconnection cables. EW 2 cables would measure up to 5.6 miles (9.1 kilometers) in length. Open-cut trenches would measure up to 10 feet (3 meters) in depth and 15 feet (4.5 meters) in width with a construction corridor width of 150 feet (46 meters) for onshore export cables and 100 feet (30 meters) for interconnection cables and operational corridor width of 25 feet (8 meters) for both onshore export and interconnection cables. The onshore cables would connect to the proposed onshore substations. Two onshore substations would be constructed and installed in support of the Projects. The SBMT in Brooklyn, New York has been identified as the location for the EW 1 onshore substation. The EW 2 onshore substation would be at one of two sites in Oceanside: EW 2 Onshore Substation A in Oceanside, New York or EW 2 Onshore Substation C in Island Park, New York. The final selection of EW 2 Onshore Substation A or EW 2 Onshore Substation C would depend upon the ability for Empire to acquire land access agreements and other site considerations. Ground-disturbing activities associated with construction of the EW 1 onshore substation would occur on a previously paved portion of the SBMT property measuring approximately 4.8 acres (1.9 hectares). For EW 2 Onshore Substation A, ground-disturbing activities associated with construction would occur on a parcel at the corner of Daly Boulevard and Hampton Road in Oceanside, New York in a portion of the parcel measuring approximately 6.4 acres (2.6 hectares) that currently supports industrial uses. For EW 2 Onshore Substation C, ground-disturbing activities associated with construction would occur on a parcel at 15 Railroad Place in Island Park, New York in a portion of the parcel measuring 5.2 acres (2.1 hectares) that currently is used for commercial purposes. The O&M facility would serve both EW 1 and EW 2 and would be at SBMT, adjacent to the EW 1 onshore substation. Ground-disturbing activities associated with the construction of the O&M facility would occur on up to 4.5 acres (1.8 hectares) of area and 15 feet (4.5 meters) of depth.

Visual APE The APE for visual effects analysis (hereafter visual APE) includes the viewshed from which renewable energy structures-whether offshore or onshore-would be visible. For offshore structures, the visual APE was delineated by first setting a study area boundary of 40 miles radial distance from the Wind Farm Development Area. This is the approximate maximum theoretical distance-a distance that does not factor in certain environmental factors such as weather or environmental conditions-at which the WTGs could be visible (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:17). Geographic information system analysis, including viewshed modeling, and subsequent field investigation were applied to delineate the visual APE methodically through a series of steps, beginning with the maximum theoretical distance WTGs could be visible. This was determined by first considering the visibility of a WTG from the water level to the tip of an upright rotor blade at a maximum height of 951 feet (290 meters). The analysis then accounted for how distance and EC impede visibility as the distance increases between the viewer and WTGs (i.e., by a 40-mile distance, even blade tips would be below the sea level horizon line). The mapping effort then removed all areas with obstructed views toward WTGs, such as those views impeded by intervening topography, vegetation, and structures. The mapping effort also accounted for areas where building or landform elevations could result in unobstructed views to the WTGs. Areas with unobstructed views of offshore Project elements then constituted the APE. See Attachment B, Figure 7, which shows the offshore visual APE for New Jersey, and Figure 8, which shows the offshore visual APE for New York. Onshore, geographic information system viewshed analysis was also applied to delineate the visual APE based on the theoretical visibility of onshore Project elements within a 2-mile (3.2-kilometer) boundary around the EW 1 substation location and connected action O&M facility upgrades and a minimum 2-mile (3.2-kilometer) boundary around each of the EW 2 substation location options (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:55, 57). See Attachment B, Figure 10 and Figure 11.

Connected Action The APE for the connected action comprises geographic areas in which historic properties are subject to effects from the SBMT port infrastructure improvement project (NYCEDC 2021). The APE proposed in the USACE/NYSDEC joint permit application for the SBMT was reviewed by New York SHPO. BOEM has reviewed and finds that delineation to be sufficient. As such, BOEM has incorporated that boundary as the connected action portion of the APE for the Empire Wind undertaking. The archaeological portion of the APE for the connected action is the depth and breadth of the ground or seabed potentially affected by any ground- or seabed bottom-disturbing activities and any temporary or permanent onshore or offshore construction or staging areas. The submerged disturbance associated with this connected action is within BOEM's delineated marine APE. The ground disturbance associated with this connected action is within BOEM's delineated terrestrial APE. Anticipated ground- or seabed bottom-disturbing activities for the connected action include bulkhead replacement, new fender installation, new wharf construction, and dredging as well as in-water and upland project actions that would create varying levels of in-water and upland ground disturbance, each of which could affect potential archaeological resources. The visual portion of the APE for the connected action includes all areas where the connected action may cause changes to land or structures and their uses, including the area of ground disturbance caused by the connected action, and locations from which elements of the project may be visible. The environment around and including the SBMT port infrastructure improvement project area is characterized as an urban waterfront, including landfill areas resembling and referred to as ""piers,"" actual pile-supported piers, warehouse buildings, a waterfront park, and a densely developed street network. The visual APE for the connected action constitutes a 0.25-mile (0.4-kilometer) buffer around the SBMT port infrastructure improvement project area.

Steps Taken to Identify Historic Properties Technical Studies and Reports To support the identification of historic properties within the APE for the Proposed Action, Empire (2022) has provided survey reports detailing the results of cultural resource investigations within the marine, terrestrial, and visual portions of the APE. Additionally, NYCEDC (2021) has provided information compiled in support of NYCEDC's joint permit application submitted to USACE/NYSDEC on NYCEDC's historic properties identification efforts within the archaeological and visual portions of the APE for the connected action. A summary of the efforts to identify historic properties and results and key findings of each investigation are provided for the Proposed Action in Table N-1 and connected action in Table N-2. Collectively, BOEM finds that these reports represent a good-faith effort to identify historic properties within the APE for the undertaking, including both the Proposed Action and connected action. The documents summarized in Table N-1 and Table N-2 have been shared with consulting parties and are hereby incorporated by reference. BOEM has reviewed the studies and resulting reports completed for the Proposed Action as summarized in Table N-1, found the studies and resulting reports sufficient, and reached the following conclusions: cent The marine archaeological investigations include surveys of areas of potential seafloor disturbance following BOEM's Guidelines for Providing Archaeological and Historic Property Information Pursuant to 30 CFR Part 585. BOEM has reviewed the final marine archaeological survey report and has determined that the data are sufficient for identifying historic properties within the marine APE. cent BOEM has reviewed the terrestrial archaeological reports submitted to date and has determined that the investigations summarized in the reports are sufficient for identifying historic properties within the terrestrial APE. cent BOEM has reviewed the VIA with visual simulations and the assessment of visual effects on historic properties for the entire PDE and determined the studies and reports are sufficient for identifying and assessing effects on historic properties within the visual APE. BOEM finds that the APE for potential visual effects analyzed is appropriate for the scale and scope of the undertaking. BOEM further finds that the inventory of historic properties is sufficient to consult on the undertaking and represents a good-faith effort to identify historic properties within the visual APE potentially affected by the undertaking, as defined at 36 CFR 800.4. BOEM has reviewed the study and resulting report completed for the connected action as summarized in Table N-2, found it sufficient, and reached the following conclusions: cent The archaeological investigation includes areas of potential ground and seabed bottom disturbance, meeting BOEM's Guidelines for Providing Archaeological and Historic Property Information Pursuant to 30 CFR Part 585. BOEM has reviewed the archaeological investigation information provided in the report and has determined that the data are sufficient for identifying marine and terrestrial archaeological resources within the connected action portion of the APE for this undertaking.