An expansive and unimpeded ocean view is considered a character-defining feature of the property's significance under Criteria A and C. It was assessed that the Projects would diminish the significant characteristics of the West Bank Light Station and result in an adverse effect on the West Bank Light Station (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:37-38). As described in the Empire Wind Cumulative Historic Resources Visual Effects Analysis, the West Bank Light Station is 27.6 miles from the nearest WTG associated with the Projects and 49.8 miles from the nearest potential WTG location for other wind energy development activities. The total number of potentially visible WTGs from the West Bank Light Station is 105. Of these, 105 theoretically visible WTGs (100 percent) would be from the proposed Projects. As such, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) determined the Projects would incrementally add to the cumulative visual effects on the West Bank Light Station when combined with the effects of other past, present, or reasonably foreseeable future actions (BOEM 2022).

The Breezy Point Surf Club Historic District is in Gateway National Recreation Area, Rockaway, Queens, New York, and is owned by the National Park Service. The property is approximately 22.0 miles (35.4 kilometers) from the Wind Farm Development Area. The Breezy Point Surf Club was initially constructed in 1937, with additional facilities constructed during the 1950s. The property consists of two sets of cabanas-the original set of small, plain 1937 structures and the 1950s set close to the ocean-pool and sports facilities, a restaurant, and ocean beach near the western tip of the Rockaway Peninsula within the Gateway National Recreation Area (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:30, 49). The Breezy Point Surf Club Historic District (CRIS No. 08101.011499) is NRHP-eligible under Criterion A for its association with the development of seaside recreation and entertainment during the Great Depression, and under Criterion C as a nearly intact example of mid-twentieth-century beach club and cabana complex. The property's period of significance is 1937-1963 (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:30). This property is on the Rockaway Peninsula and has had clear ocean views since the Breezy Point Surf Club was constructed. The beach club's facilities provide expansive views of the Atlantic Ocean in one of New York City's last undeveloped locations. As an unimpeded ocean view and recreational use are considered character-defining features of the property's significance, it was assessed that the Projects would diminish the significant characteristics of the Breezy Point Surf Club Historic District and result in an adverse effect on the Breezy Point Surf Club Historic District (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:30).

As described in the Empire Wind Cumulative Historic Resources Visual Effects Analysis, the Breezy Point Surf Club Historic District is 23.1 miles from the nearest WTG associated with the Projects and 45.4 miles from the nearest potential WTG location for other wind energy development activities. The total number of potentially visible WTGs from the Breezy Point Surf Club Historic District is 102. Of these, 102 theoretically visible WTGs (100 percent) would be from the proposed Projects. As such, BOEM determined the Projects would incrementally add to the cumulative visual effects on the Breezy Point Surf Club Historic District when combined with the effects of other past, present, or reasonably foreseeable future actions (BOEM 2022).

The Silver Gull Beach Club Historic District is located in Gateway National Recreation Area, Rockaway, Queens, New York, and the Silver Gull Beach Club is owned by the National Park Service. The property is approximately 22.0 miles (35.4 kilometers) from the Wind Farm Development Area. The Silver Gull Beach Club was constructed in 1962 and consists of adjoining rows of cabanas, a clubhouse, pool, athletic facilities, and ocean beach on the Rockaway Peninsula within the Gateway National Recreation Area (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:30-32, 49). The Silver Gull Beach Club Historic District (CRIS No. 08101.012423) is NRHP-eligible under Criterion A for its association with the development of seaside recreation and entertainment in the post-Second World War period, and under Criterion C as a nearly intact example of oceanfront recreation architecture. The property's period of significance is 1962-1963 (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:30-31). This property is on the Rockaway Peninsula and has had clear ocean views since the Silver Gull Beach Club was constructed. The beach club's facilities provide expansive views of the Atlantic Ocean in one of New York City's last undeveloped locations. As an unimpeded ocean view is considered a character-defining feature of the property's significance, it was assessed that the Projects would diminish the significant characteristics of the Silver Gull Beach Club Historic District and result in an adverse effect on the Silver Gull Beach Club Historic District (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:30-31).

As described in the Empire Wind Cumulative Historic Resources Visual Effects Analysis, the Silver Gull Beach Club Historic District is 22.1 miles from the nearest WTG associated with the Projects and 44.4 miles from the nearest potential WTG location for other wind energy development activities. The total number of potentially visible WTGs from the Silver Gull Beach Club Historic District is 114. Of these, 114 theoretically visible WTGs (100 percent) would be from the proposed Projects. As such, BOEM determined the Projects would incrementally add to the cumulative visual effects on the Silver Gull Beach Club Historic District when combined with the effects of other past, present, or reasonably foreseeable future actions (BOEM 2022).

Jacob Riis Park Historic District is located in Gateway National Recreation Area, Rockaway, Queens, New York (National Park Service) and is approximately 20.7 miles (33.2 kilometers) from the Wind Farm Development Area. Jacob Riis Park was created in 1932, led by New York City Park Commissioner Robert Moses. The park features a beachfront and parklands for recreational activities and includes several buildings, such as the prominent main bathhouse, that feature Art Deco designs (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:32, 50). Jacob Riis Park is owned by the National Park Service and was listed in the NRHP in 1981 under Criterion C as an excellent example of Work Progress Administration park design during the 1930s. The district's period of significance is 1932-1937 (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:32-33). This property is on the Rockaway Peninsula and has had clear ocean views since Jacob Riis Park was constructed. The park's focus, both in terms of purpose and orientation, is the unobstructed access and view of the ocean. It was assessed that the introduction of the Projects in Jacob Riis Park Historic District's ocean viewshed would diminish the significant characteristics of the property and result in an adverse effect on the Jacob Riis Park Historic District (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:32-33, 50).

As described in the Empire Wind Cumulative Historic Resources Visual Effects Analysis, the Jacob Riis Park Historic District is 20.8 miles from the nearest WTG associated with the Projects and 43.1 miles from the nearest potential WTG location for other wind energy development activities. The total number of potentially visible WTGs from the Jacob Riis Park Historic District is 131. Of these, 131 theoretically visible WTGs (100 percent) would be from the proposed Projects. As such, BOEM determined the Projects would incrementally add to the cumulative visual effects on the Jacob Riis Park Historic District when combined with the effects of other past, present, or reasonably foreseeable future actions (BOEM 2022).

Jones Beach State Park/Jones Beach State Park, Causeway and Parkway System is located in Hempstead/Oyster Bay, New York and is approximately 12.8 miles (20.6 kilometers) from the Wind Farm Development Area. Construction of Jones Beach State Park began in 1925 under the leadership of New York City Parks Commissioner Robert Moses and continued through mid-1950s. The park includes ocean and bay fronts, landscaped roads and paths, a boardwalk, a building complex consisting of bathhouses, and service and recreational facilities. Moses envisioned the Jones Beach State Park as a combination of natural landscapes and the oceanside transportation network (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:41, 50). The Jones Beach State Park/Jones Beach State Park, Causeway and Parkway System (NR No. 81000081) was listed in the NRHP in 2005 under Criterion A for its association with the development of public oceanside recreation facilities on Long Island, and under Criterion C for the Beaux Arts design and Art Deco motifs of its buildings and the overall design of the park as a beach-oriented development. The property's period of significance is 1925-1955 (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:41). This property is on Jones Beach Island and has had clear ocean views since Jones Beach State Park was constructed. The focus of the Jones Beach State Park, both in terms of purpose and orientation, is the ocean access and views the park offers. It was assessed that the Projects would diminish these significant characteristics of the property and result in an adverse effect on the Jones Beach State Park/Jones Beach State Park, Causeway and Parkway System (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:41-42).

As described in the Empire Wind Cumulative Historic Resources Visual Effects Analysis, the Jones Beach State Park is 15.0 miles from the nearest WTG associated with the Projects and 31.7 miles from the nearest potential WTG location for other wind energy development activities. The total number of potentially visible WTGs from the Jones Beach State Park is 211. Of these, 147 theoretically visible WTGs (70 percent) would be from the proposed Projects. As such, BOEM determined the Projects would incrementally add to the cumulative visual effects on Jones Beach State Park when combined with the effects of other past, present, or reasonably foreseeable future actions (BOEM 2022).

Robert Moses State Park is located in Babylon/Islip, New York at 600 Robert Moses State Parkway at the western end of Fire Island and is approximately 20.6 miles (34.8 kilometers) from the Wind Farm Development Area. Robert Moses State Park (originally named Fire Island State Park) was established in 1908 as the first state park on Long Island. The Robert Moses State Park originally featured several bathhouses, beachfront, and open parkland. Robert Moses State Park was accessible only by ferry or private boat until the construction of the Robert Moses Causeway in 1964 (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:42, 50). Robert Moses State Park (CRIS No. 10305.001592) is NRHP-eligible as a historic district under Criterion A for its association with the development of Long Island's south shore as a recreation destination for urban and suburban residents, and under Criterion C for its recreation architecture. Robert Moses State Park's period of significance is 1908-1964 (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:42). This property is on Fire Island and has had clear ocean views since Robert Moses State Park was established as a state park. The focus of the Robert Moses State Park, both in terms of purpose and orientation, is the ocean access and views it provides. It was assessed that the introduction of the Projects within the Robert Moses State Park's ocean viewshed would diminish these significant characteristics of the property and result in an adverse effect on the Robert Moses State Park (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:42).

As described in the Empire Wind Cumulative Historic Resources Visual Effects Analysis, the Robert Moses State Park is 20.6 miles from the nearest WTG associated with the Projects and 24.4 miles from the nearest potential WTG location for other wind energy development activities. The total number of potentially visible WTGs from the Robert Moses State Park is 211. Of these, 147 theoretically visible WTGs (70 percent) would be from the proposed Projects. As such, BOEM determined the Projects would incrementally add to the cumulative visual effects on the Robert Moses State Park when combined with the effects of other past, present, or reasonably foreseeable future actions (BOEM 2022).

Fire Island Lighthouse is located in Islip, New York, within Fire Island National Seashore and is approximately 21.7 miles (36.0 kilometers) from the Wind Farm Development Area. The extant lighthouse was constructed in 1858, replacing the first lighthouse at the site that had been constructed in 1826. The Fire Island Lighthouse is 150 feet in height and features a hollow central column of cast iron clad in brick and covered with a cement wash. The Fire Island Lighthouse's original lamp was a first-order Fresnel lens, which was lit by a succession of various fuels until the light was electrified in 1939 (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:36, 50). The Fire Island Lighthouse (NR No. 81000082) was listed in the NRHP in 1981. The Fire Island Lighthouse is listed under Criterion A for its association with the early federally sponsored program of maritime navigational aids and is significant in the areas of maritime history, transportation, communication, commerce, and military. The property is also listed under Criterion C as an excellent example of mid-nineteenth-century maritime engineering and architecture, and under Criterion D for its potential to contain significant post-contact archaeological deposits. The district's period of significance is 1825-1960 (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:36). The property is on Fire Island and has had unimpeded ocean views since it was constructed. Unobstructed sightlines out to the Atlantic Ocean are an important characteristic of the lighthouse's setting and purpose as an aid to maritime navigation. It was assessed that the Projects would diminish this significant characteristic of the property and result in an adverse effect on the Fire Island Lighthouse (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:36-37).

As described in the Empire Wind Cumulative Historic Resources Visual Effects Analysis, the Fire Island Lighthouse is 21.7 miles from the nearest WTG associated with the Projects and 24.2 miles from the nearest potential WTG location for other wind energy development activities. The total number of potentially visible WTGs from the Fire Island Lighthouse is 258. Of these, 147 theoretically visible WTGs (57 percent) would be from the proposed Projects. As such, BOEM determined the Projects would incrementally add to the cumulative visual effects on the Fire Island Lighthouse when combined with the effects of other past, present, or reasonably foreseeable future actions (BOEM 2022).

Fire Island Lighthouse Historic District is located in Islip, New York, within Fire Island National Seashore and is approximately 21.7 miles (36.0 kilometers) from the Wind Farm Development Area. The extant lighthouse was constructed in 1858, replacing the first lighthouse at the site that had been constructed in 1826. In addition to the lighthouse and Keeper's House, the Fire Island Lighthouse Historic District is composed of 14 other contributing buildings, sites, and structures (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:36, 50). The Fire Island Lighthouse Historic District (NR No. 09001288) was listed in the NRHP in 2009. The district is listed under Criterion A for its association with the early federally sponsored program of maritime navigational aids and is significant in the areas of maritime history, transportation, communication, commerce, and military. The property is also listed under Criterion C as an excellent example of mid-nineteenth century maritime engineering and architecture, and under Criterion D for its potential to contain significant post-contact archaeological deposits. The district's period of significance is 1825-1960 (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:36). The property is on Fire Island and has had unimpeded ocean views since it was constructed. Unobstructed sightlines out to the Atlantic Ocean are an important characteristic of the lighthouse's setting and purpose as an aid to maritime navigation. It was assessed that the Projects would diminish this significant characteristic of the property and result in an adverse effect on the Fire Island Lighthouse Historic District (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:36-37).

As described in the Empire Wind Cumulative Historic Resources Visual Effects Analysis, the Fire Island Lighthouse Historic District is 21.7 miles from the nearest WTG associated with the Projects and 24.2 miles from the nearest potential WTG location for other wind energy development activities. The total number of potentially visible WTGs from the Fire Island Lighthouse Historic District is 211. Of these, 147 theoretically visible WTGs (70 percent) would be from the proposed Projects. As such, BOEM determined the Projects would incrementally add to the cumulative visual effects on the Fire Island Lighthouse Historic District when combined with the effects of other past, present, or reasonably foreseeable future actions (BOEM 2022).

Carrington House is located in Brook Haven, New York, on Fire Island within Fire Island National Seashore and is approximately 24.9 miles (40.1 kilometers) from the Wind Farm Development Area. Carrington House was constructed circa 1912. The Craftsman-style influenced bungalow is an early, intact example of resort community residences on Fire Island. Carrington House's Craftsman-style elements include its wood-shingle cladding and exposed rafter ends (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:37, 50). Carrington House (National Register No. 13001057) was listed in the NRHP in 2014. The property is listed under Criterion A for its association with its owner's, theater director Frank Carrington, use of the residence as a salon for gay artists, actors, and writers during the mid-twentieth century. Carrington House is also listed under Criterion C as an intact example of beach bungalow architecture. The property's period of significance is 1912-1969, the period from its construction to the year Frank Carrington deeded the property to the National Park Service (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:37). The property is on Fire Island and has had unimpeded ocean views since Carrington House was constructed. As an unimpeded ocean view is considered a character-defining feature of the property's significance, it was assessed that the Projects would diminish the significant characteristics of the property and result in an adverse effect on Carrington House (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:37).

As described in the Empire Wind Cumulative Historic Resources Visual Effects Analysis, Carrington House is 26.1 miles from the nearest WTG associated with the Projects and 24.4 miles from the nearest potential WTG location for other wind energy development activities. The total number of potentially visible WTGs from Carrington House is 211. Of these, 147 theoretically visible WTGs (70 percent) would be from the proposed Projects. As such, BOEM determined the Projects would incrementally add to the cumulative visual effects on Carrington House when combined with the effects of other past, present, or reasonably foreseeable future actions (BOEM 2022).

Point O'Woods Historic District is located in Islip, New York, centrally on Fire Island and is approximately 24.0 miles (38.6 kilometers) from the Wind Farm Development Area. Point O'Woods was established in 1894 as a Methodist community by the Long Island Chautauqua Assembly Association. Point O'Woods includes 133 residential buildings, as well as additional community structures and maintenance facilities. Nearly all the buildings within Point O'Woods Historic District feature Shingle style designs, popular among residents of shore communities in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Point O'Woods differs from other shore communities of the period in its overall design, which used curved roads and paths, rather than the more common rectangular grid plan (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:42, 50). The Point O'Woods Historic District (CRIS No. 10302.003470) is NRHP-eligible under Criterion A for its association with the Chautauqua movement and development of private Methodist beach communities in the early twentieth century, and under Criterion C for its comprehensive and innovative design as a beach community. The district's period of significance is 1894 to circa 1962 (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:42-43). The property is on Fire Island and has had clear ocean views since Point O'Woods was constructed. Ocean access and views were important considerations in the siting and establishment of the Point O'Woods community. It was assessed that the introduction of the Projects into the ocean viewshed of Point O'Woods Historic District may diminish this significant characteristic of the property and result in an adverse effect on the Point O'Woods Historic District (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:42-43).

As described in the Empire Wind Cumulative Historic Resources Visual Effects Analysis, the Point O'Woods Historic District is 24.2 miles from the nearest WTG associated with the Projects and 24.2 miles from the nearest potential WTG location for other wind energy development activities. The total number of potentially visible WTGs from Point O'Woods Historic District is 211. Of these, 147 theoretically visible WTGs (70 percent) would be from the proposed Projects. As such, BOEM determined the Projects would incrementally add to the cumulative visual effects on the Point O'Woods Historic District when combined with the effects of other past, present, or reasonably foreseeable future actions (BOEM 2022).

Romer Shoal Light Station is located offshore within Lower New York Bay, New Jersey, and the Romer Shoal Light Station is approximately 25.7 miles (41.3 kilometers) from the Wind Farm Development Area. Romer Shoal Light Station was built in 1898 as a maritime navigational aid at the entry to New York Harbor. The Romer Shoal Light Station consists of a 30-foot-diameter cast iron cylindrical caisson filled with rock and concrete that supports a four-story cast iron tower. A circular watch room surrounded by a galley and surmounted by a lantern sits atop the tower. The Romer Shoal Light Station was originally lit by a fourth-order Fresnel lens but has been automated since 1966 (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:43, 50).