On July 12, 2021, Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) invited Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, the Delaware Nation, Delaware Tribe of Indians, Eastern Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma, the Mashantucket Pequot Tribal Nation, the Mohegan Tribe of Indians of Connecticut, the Narragansett Indian Tribe, Shawnee Tribe, the Shinnecock Indian Nation, and the Stockbridge-Munsee Community Band of Mohican Indians to participate in a government-to-government consultation meeting. The email outreach also notified the tribes that public scoping meeting recordings and materials could be accessed via the virtual meeting website. During the period of July 13-30, 2021, BOEM corresponded with the tribes who responded to the government-to-government consultation meeting invitation to schedule the meeting during a day and time of mutual availability. On July 21, 2021, BOEM invited the Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, Delaware Nation, Delaware Tribe of Indians, Eastern Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma, the Mashantucket Pequot Tribal Nation, Mohegan Tribe of Indians of Connecticut, Narragansett Indian Tribe, Shawnee Tribe, and Shinnecock Indian Nation Stockbridge-Munsee Community Band of Mohican Indians to participate in a government-to-government consultation meeting on Tuesday, August 3, 2021. BOEM hosted a government-to-government consultation meeting with the Mashantucket Pequot Tribal Nation, Shinnecock Indian Nation, Delaware Nation, Delaware Tribe of Indians, and Wampanoag Tribe of Gay Head (Aquinnah) on August 3, 2021. During the meeting, BOEM presented information about the Projects and solicited input regarding reasonable alternatives for consideration in the Environmental Impact Statement (EIS); the identification of historic properties or potential effects on historic properties from activities associated with the proposed Projects; and potential measures to avoid, minimize, or mitigate impacts on environmental and cultural resources to be analyzed in the EIS. In a letter dated November 22, 2021, the Mashantucket Pequot Tribal Nation indicated that the Mashantucket Pequot Tribal Nation no longer wanted to consult on the Projects. On March 1, 2022, United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) submitted the findings and recommendations from USACE's cultural resource investigations for the South Brooklyn Marine Terminal (SBMT) port infrastructure improvement project (New York City Economic Development Corporation (NYCEDC) 2021). On March 21, 2022, New York State Historic Preservation Office (New York SHPO) notified USACE of New York SHPO's concurrence of a finding of No Adverse Effect on historic properties from the SBMT port infrastructure improvement project (Attachment E, New York SHPO Letter of Concurrence on Finding of No Adverse Effect on Historic Properties from South Brooklyn Marine Terminal Port Infrastructure Upgrades). BOEM distributed additional invitations to Borough of Allenhurst, Middletown Township, Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association, Romer Shoal and West Bank Light Stations, Silver Gull Beach Club Historic District (National Park Service), and Water Witch (Monmouth Hills) Historic District on March 23, 2022. BOEM distributed additional invitations to Gilgo State Park, Jones Beach State Park, Long Island State Parks (Region 9 of New York State Parks), and Robert Moses State Park on March 23, 2022. BOEM distributed correspondence to notify consulting parties of Project modifications on September 7, 2022. On September 12, 2022, BOEM held virtual National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) Section 106 Consultation Meeting #1. The presentation included a brief Project overview, review of National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) Substitution for NHPA Section 106 Process, overview of Section 106 consultation opportunities for the Projects, NHPA Section 110(f) compliance requirements, and question and answer session with discussion. On November 18, 2022, BOEM shared with consulting parties the complete terrestrial archaeological resources report, complete marine archaeological resources report, complete historic resources visual effects assessment, supplemental architectural survey report, and complete cumulative visual effects assessment report. At that time, BOEM also shared with consulting parties a technical memorandum detailing the delineation of the Area of Potential Effect (APE) for the undertaking. BOEM held virtual NHPA Section 106 Consultation Meeting #2 during the Draft EIS public comment period. The presentation included a discussion of the documents distributed for consulting party review, and included a question and answer session with discussion. BOEM distributed a Notice of Availability to notify the consulting parties that the Draft EIS was available for public review and comment for the period of November 18 to January 17, 2023. BOEM plans to hold two additional consultation meetings to consult on the finding of effect and the resolution of adverse effects, to receive additional input regarding the Draft EIS analysis, and to consult on a Memorandum of Agreement prior to issuing the Record of Decision (ROD). Additional consultation meetings may be scheduled prior to issuance of the ROD if further consultation is needed to resolve adverse effects via a Memorandum of Agreement.

N.3. Application of the Criteria of Adverse Effect

The Criteria of Adverse Effect under NHPA Section 106 (36 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 800.5(a)(1)) states that an undertaking has an adverse effect on a historic property when an undertaking may alter, directly or indirectly, any of the characteristics of a historic property that qualify the property for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) in a manner that would diminish the integrity of the property's location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, or association... Adverse Effects may include reasonably foreseeable effects caused by the undertaking that may occur later in time, be farther removed in distance or be cumulative. According to regulation, adverse effects on historic properties include, but are not limited to (36 CFR 800.5(a)(2)): 

i. Physical destruction of or damage to all or part of the property; 
ii. Alteration of a property, including restoration, rehabilitation, repair, maintenance, stabilization, hazardous material remediation, and provision of handicapped access, that is not consistent with the Secretary of the Interior's standards for the treatment of historic properties (36 CFR part 68) and applicable guidelines; 
iii. Removal of the property from its historic location; 
iv. Change of the character of the property's use or of physical features within the property's setting that contribute to its historic significance; 
v. Introduction of visual, atmospheric or audible elements that diminish the integrity of the property's significant historic features; 
vi. Neglect of a property that causes its deterioration, except where such neglect and deterioration are recognized qualities of a property of religious and cultural significance to an Indian tribe or Native Hawaiian organization; and 
vii. Transfer, lease, or sale of property out of federal ownership or control without adequate and legally enforceable restrictions or conditions to ensure long-term preservation of the property's historic significance.

N.4. Assessment of Effects on Historic Properties

This section documents assessment of effects for the affected historic properties in the APE, including areas for the Proposed Action and the connected action. N.4.1 Proposed Action N.4.1.1. Assessment of Effects on Historic Properties in the Marine APE This section assesses effects on marine cultural resources (i.e., marine archaeological resources and ancient submerged landforms) in the marine APE. The extent of marine cultural investigations performed for the Proposed Action does not enable conclusive determinations of eligibility for listing identified resources in the NRHP; as such, BOEM is considering all identified marine archaeological resources and ancient submerged landforms eligible and, therefore, historic properties. Based on the information presented below, BOEM finds historic properties would be adversely affected in the marine APE.

N.4.1.1.1 Marine Archaeological Resources

Marine geophysical archaeological surveys within the marine APE identified a total of 30 magnetic anomalies, acoustic contacts, and buried reflectors representing potential marine archaeological resources (Table N-3; Construction and Operations Plan (COP) Volume 3, Appendix X; Empire 2022): seven within the Lease Area, 21 within the Empire Wind 1 (EW 1) submarine export cable route, and two within the Empire Wind 2 (EW 2) submarine export cable route. As ages of these resources cannot be confirmed through the marine cultural investigations at this time, these resources are all assumed to be archaeological and therefore cultural resources potentially eligible for listing in the NRHP. The majority of the potential marine archaeological resources likely relate to recent debris, industrial objects, and non-cultural geological features, although many may represent known and potential shipwrecks and related debris fields from the post-contact period (COP Volume 3, Appendix X; Empire 2022). Remotely operated vehicle surveys planned for the summer of 2022 may reveal that some of the identified targets do not represent potentially sensitive marine archaeological resources (COP Volume 2, Section 6.1.3.1; Empire 2022).

N-22
Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP

Table N-3: Marine Archaeological Resources within the Marine APE

Resource ID / Location within Marine APE / Potential Source / Finding of Effect

Target 01 / Known shipwreck Durley Chine / Lease Area / Adverse effect, potential for avoidance, minimization, or mitigation (AMM)

Target 02 / Known shipwreck Irma C / Lease Area / Adverse effect, potential for AMM

... 

The severity of Project effects would depend on the extent to which integral or significant components of the affected marine archaeological resource are disturbed, damaged, or destroyed, resulting in the loss of contributing elements to the historic property's eligibility for listing in the NRHP. Avoidance of Targets 01-21, 23-26, and 28-30 was recommended by a minimum distance of 50 meters (164 feet) from the extent of the magnetic anomalies or acoustic contacts. Avoidance of Targets 22 and 27 was recommended by a minimum distance of 30 meters (98 feet) from the extent of the acoustic contacts. However, Empire has not committed to avoiding these resources and the associated avoidance buffers of these resources. Therefore, the 30 marine archaeological resources identified in Empire's marine cultural investigations that are assumed historic properties are anticipated to experience adverse effects from the undertaking. Adverse effects on these resources may potentially be avoided, minimized, or mitigated in the final Project design. 

N.4.1.1.2 Ancient Submerged Landforms

Ancient submerged landforms may be individually eligible for listing in the NRHP or considered contributing elements to a Traditional Cultural Property (TCP) eligible for listing in the NRHP. Ancient submerged landforms in the marine APE are considered archaeologically sensitive. Although the marine geophysical remote-sensing studies performed to identify historic properties did not find direct evidence of pre-contact Native American cultural materials, they do represent a good-faith effort to identify submerged historic properties within the APE potentially affected by the undertaking, as defined at 36 CFR 800.4. If undiscovered archaeological resources are present within the identified ancient submerged landforms and they retain sufficient integrity, these resources could be eligible for listing in the NRHP under Criterion D. Furthermore, ancient submerged landforms are considered by Native American tribes in the region to be culturally significant resources as the lands where their ancestors lived and as locations where events described in tribal histories occurred prior to inundation. In addition, BOEM recognizes these landforms are similar to features previously determined to be TCPs and that are presumed to be eligible for listing in the NRHP under Criterion A. Empire's marine geophysical archaeological surveys identified 22 geomorphic features representing potential ancient submerged landforms with archaeological or TCP historic property potential (Table N-4; COP Volume 3, Appendix X; Empire 2022): 14 within the Lease Area, six within the EW 1 submarine export cable route, and two within the EW 2 submarine export cable route.

Table N-4: Ancient submerged landforms within the marine APE

Landform ID / Location within Marine APE / Finding of Effect

Target 31 / EW 2 Submarine ECR / Adverse effect, potential for AMM

Target 32 / EW 2 Submarine ECR / Adverse effect, potential for AMM

... 

A geoarchaeological analysis of ancient submerged landforms analyzed a total of 31 borings in an attempt to field verify the High-Resolution Geophysical (HRG) data and develop a temporal framework across the preliminary APE. Indicators of pedogenesis recovered from the borings represent portions of the former sub-aerial surfaces associated with the Paleo Hudson. Radiocarbon dating established that these surfaces predate the period for which there is scientific evidence of human occupation of North America. Subsequent vibracore and borehole samples returned similarly aged submerged surfaces and indicated that submerged surfaces associated with Holocene and Pleistocene paleochannels were sparse and poorly preserved. The severity of Project effects would depend on the extent to which integral or significant components of the affected ancient submerged landform are disturbed, damaged, or destroyed, resulting in the loss of contributing elements to the historic property's eligibility for listing in the NRHP. Avoidance or minimization measures were recommended for ancient submerged landforms; these measures may include micro-siting facilities and work zones away from features and avoidance buffers or adjusting burial depth of cabling across features. If avoidance is not feasible, additional archaeological investigation is recommended. This may include refined HRG survey, archival/background research, or diver/remotely operated vehicle verification to determine the source(s) of the target and assess the target's integrity, significance, and eligibility for listing in the NRHP as a historic property. However, development of the final Project design is ongoing, and it is currently unclear whether Empire would be able to avoid effects on the identified ancient submerged landforms. As such, the undertaking is anticipated to have adverse effects on the 22 ancient submerged landforms identified within the marine APE. Adverse effects on these resources may potentially be avoided, minimized, or mitigated in the final Project design. N.4.1.2. Assessment of Effects on Historic Properties in the Terrestrial APE Cultural resource investigations completed for the Proposed Action identified no historic properties within the terrestrial APE (COP Volume 3, Appendix Y; Empire 2022). The Projects have been designed to avoid adverse effects on terrestrial archaeological resources by siting onshore Project components within previously disturbed areas and existing road right-of-way to the extent practicable. Based on this information, BOEM finds no effect on historic properties in the terrestrial APE. However, as deemed necessary by New York SHPO, Empire has committed to conducting archaeological monitoring during construction in up to seven locations within the terrestrial APE for EW 2 that have been determined to have an elevated, moderate potential for presently undiscovered terrestrial archaeological resources (COP Volume 3, Appendix Y; Empire 2022). Potential terrestrial archaeological resources or human remains identified during Empire's construction monitoring process may be subject to adverse effects. Empire will develop and implement an Unanticipated Discoveries Plan to minimize or mitigate impacts on potential presently undiscovered terrestrial archaeological resources and human remains that could be affected by the undertaking (COP Volume 3, Appendix Y; Empire 2022). This plan will be shared with the consulting parties for the consulting parties' review and comment. N.4.1.3. Assessment of Effects on Historic Properties in the Visual APE Review of the offshore visual area identified 15 historic districts and 25 individual historic properties, and review of the onshore visual area identified one historic district and three individual historic properties. Of these, 16 historic properties would be adversely affected by visual impacts from the proposed Projects (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022). The 16 adversely affected historic properties within the visual APE, described below, are those that retain maritime setting and where maritime setting contributes to the properties' NRHP eligibility. Each property continues to offer significant seaward views that support the integrity of the property's maritime setting. Those seaward views include vantage points with the potential for an open view from each property toward the offshore Project elements. Where BOEM found adverse visual effects on these historic properties, BOEM also determined that the undertaking would cause cumulative visual effects (BOEM 2022). Cumulative effects are additive effects; where BOEM has determined adverse effects would occur from Project actions on historic properties, BOEM then assessed if those effects would add to the potential adverse effects of other reasonably foreseeable actions and thereby result in cumulative effects. 

N-26 Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP N.4.1.3.1

West Bank Light Station, Staten Island, New York

This property is in Lower New York Bay, approximately 3 nautical miles (5.6 kilometers) east of New Dorp Beach, Staten Island, New York and is approximately 27.8 miles (44.7 kilometers) from the Wind Farm Development Area. The light station, constructed in 1901, consists of a cast iron caisson expanding in a trumpet shape to form a gallery that supports an iron conical tower surmounted by a black lantern (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:37, 49). The West Bank Light Station (NR No. 06001230) was listed in the NRHP in 2006 under Criterion A for its association with the federal program of coastal maritime history, and Criterion C as an excellent example of maritime-related architecture. The property is listed as part of the Light Stations of the United States multiple property submission. The property's period of significance is 1901-1971 (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:37-38). The West Bank Light Station is near the entrance to New York Harbor with a relatively unobstructed view toward the Projects between Sandy Hook and Rockaway Point. The light station's significance as a historic aid to navigation is tied substantially to the light station's setting, and the introduction of the Projects would likely affect this setting.