In this circumstance, the Signatories agree that the following describes how BOEM will conduct phased identification and evaluation of historic architectural resources, pursuant to 36 CFR 800.4(b)(2) and consistent with the Section 106 Phased Identification Plan (see Attachment 5): 1. For identification of historic properties within the portions of the visual APE, supplemental technical studies will be conducted by Empire Wind in accordance with state guidelines and recommendations presented in BOEM's most recent Guidelines. The developer will coordinate with the New York and New Jersey SHPOs prior to the initiation of any such identification efforts in their respective states. i. BOEM will require that identification efforts be documented in a technical report that address the identification of historic properties and include an evaluation of effects due to the Project. ii. BOEM will require that identification efforts for historic architectural resources in the state of New Jersey be documented in a supplemental architectural survey report, consistent with NJ SHPO guidelines. iii. BOEM will require that preparation of a supplemental Historic Architectural Visual Effects Assessment that includes effects recommendations due to the Project on historic properties identified in the supplemental architectural survey report. 2. BOEM will consult on the results of historic property identification surveys for any portions of the APE that were not addressed in the pre-approval consultations. 3. BOEM will treat all identified potential historic properties as eligible for inclusion in the NRHP unless BOEM determines, and the SHPOs agrees, that a property is ineligible, pursuant to 36 CFR 800.4(c). 4. If effects on identified historic properties cannot be avoided, BOEM will evaluate the NRHP eligibility of the potentially affected properties, in accordance with 36 CFR 800.4. 14
145	5. If BOEM identifies no additional historic properties or determines that no historic properties are adversely affected due to these identification efforts, BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, will notify and consult with the signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties following the consultation process set forth here in this stipulation. i. Empire Wind will notify all the signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties about the surveys and BOEM's determination by providing a written summary of the surveys including any maps, a summary of the surveys and/or research conducted to identify historic properties and assess effects, and copies of the surveys. ii. BOEM and Empire Wind will allow the signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties 30 calendar days to review and comment on the survey reports, the results of the surveys, BOEM's determination, and the documents. iii. After the 30-calendar review period has concluded and no comments require additional consultation, Empire Wind will notify the signatories and consulting parties that the New Jersey SHPO and/or the New York SHPO has concurred with BOEM's determination, if they received any comments, provide a summary of the comments and BOEM's responses. iv. BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, will conduct any consultation meetings if requested by the signatories or consulting parties. v. This MOA will not need to be amended if no additional historic properties are identified and/or adversely affected. 6. If BOEM determines new adverse effects to historic properties will occur due to result of these surveys, BOEM with the assistance of Empire Wind will notify and consult with the signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties regarding BOEM's finding and the proposed measures to resolve the adverse effect(s) including the development of a new treatment plan(s) following the consultation process set forth here in this stipulation. i. Empire Wind will notify all signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties about the surveys and BOEM's determination by providing a written summary of the results including any maps, a summary of the surveys and/or research conducted to identify historic properties and assess effects, copies of the surveys, BOEM's determination, and the proposed resolution measures for the adverse effect(s). ii. The signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties will have 30 calendar days to review and comment on the documents including the adverse effect finding and the proposed resolution of adverse effect(s), including a draft treatment plan(s). iii. BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, will conduct additional consultation meetings, if necessary, during consultation on the adverse effect finding and during drafting and finalization of the treatment plan(s). iv. BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, will respond to the comments and make necessary edits to the documents. v. Empire Wind will send the revised draft final documents to the other signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties for review and comment during a 30-calendar day review and comment period. With this same submittal of draft final documents, Empire 15
146	Wind will provide a summary of all the comments received on the documents and BOEM's responses. vi. BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, will respond to the comments on the draft final documents and make necessary edits to the documents vii. Empire Wind will notify all the signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties and provide the final document(s) including the final treatment plan(s) and a summary of comments and BOEM's responses to comments, if they receive any on the draft final documents, after BOEM has received concurrence from the New Jersey SHPO and/or New York SHPO on the finding of new adverse effect(s), and BOEM has accepted the final treatment plan(s). viii. The MOA will not need to be amended after the treatment plan(s) is accepted by BOEM. 7. If a SHPO disagrees with BOEM's determination regarding whether an affected property is eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, or if the ACHP or the Secretary so request, the agency official will obtain a determination of eligibility from the Secretary pursuant to 36 CFR Part 63 (36 CFR 800.4(c)(2)). V. REVIEW PROCESS FOR DOCUMENTS A. The following process will be used for any document, report, or plan produced in accordance with Stipulations of this MOA: 1. Draft Document i. Empire Wind shall provide the document to BOEM for technical review and approval a. BOEM has 15 calendar days to complete its technical review. b. If BOEM does not provide approval, it shall submit its comments back to Empire Wind, who will have 15 calendar days to address the comments. ii. BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, shall provide the draft document to consulting parties, except the ACHP, for review and comment. a. Consulting parties shall have 30 calendar days to review and comment. b. BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, shall coordinate a meeting with consulting parties to facilitate comments on the document if requested by a consulting party. c. BOEM shall consolidate comments received and provide them to Empire Wind within 15 calendar days of receiving comments from consulting parties. d. BOEM with the assistance of Empire Wind, will respond to the comments and make necessary edits to the documents. 2. Draft Final Document i. Empire Wind shall provide BOEM with the draft final document for technical review and approval a. BOEM has 15 calendar days to complete its technical review. b. If BOEM does not provide approval, it shall submit its comments back to Empire Wind, who will have 15 calendar days to address the comments. ii. BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, shall provide the final draft document to consulting parties, except the ACHP, for review and comment. a. Consulting parties shall have 30 calendar days to review and comment. b. BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, shall coordinate a meeting with consulting parties to facilitate comments on the document if requested by a consulting party. c. BOEM shall consolidate comments received and provide them to Empire Wind within 15 calendar days of receiving comments from consulting parties. 16
147	d. BOEM with the assistance of Empire Wind, will respond to the comments and make necessary edits to the documents. 3. Final Document i. Empire Wind shall provide BOEM with the final document approval a. BOEM has 15 calendar days to complete its technical review. b. If BOEM does not provide approval, it shall submit its comments back to Empire Wind, who will have 15 calendar days to address the comments. c. BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, shall provide the final document to consulting parties, except the ACHP, within 30 calendar days of approving the final document. With this same submittal of final documents, Empire Wind will provide a summary of all the comments received on the documents and BOEM's responses. VI. SUBMISSION OF DOCUMENTS A. New Jersey SHPO, New York SHPO, ACHP, NPS, Tribes, and Consulting Parties 1. All submittals to the New Jersey SHPO, New York SHPO, ACHP, NPS, Tribes, and consulting parties will be submitted electronically unless a specific request is made for the submittal be provided in paper format. VII. PROJECT MODIFICATIONS A. If Empire Wind proposes any modifications to the Project that expands the Project beyond the Project Design Envelope included in the COP and/or occurs outside the defined APEs or the proposed modifications change BOEM's final Section 106 determinations and findings for this Project, Empire Wind shall notify and provide BOEM with information concerning the proposed modifications. BOEM will determine if these modifications require alteration of the conclusions reached in the Finding of Effect and, thus, will require additional consultation with the signatories, invited signatories and consulting parties. If BOEM determines additional consultation is required, Empire Wind will provide the signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties with the information concerning the proposed changes, and they will have 30 calendar days from receipt of this information to comment on the proposed changes. BOEM shall take into account any comments from signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties prior to agreeing to any proposed changes. Using the procedure below, BOEM will, as necessary, consult with the signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties to identify and evaluate historic properties in any newly affected areas, assess the effects of the modification(s), and resolve any adverse effects. 1. If the Project is modified and BOEM identifies no additional historic properties or determines that no historic properties are adversely affected due to the modification, BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, will notify and consult with the signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties following the consultation process set forth in this Stipulation VII.A.1. i. Empire Wind will notify all the signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties about this proposed change and BOEM's determination by providing a written summary of the project modification including any maps, a summary of any additional surveys and/or research conducted to identify historic properties and assess effects, and copies of the surveys. ii. BOEM and Empire Wind will allow the signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties 30 calendar days to review and comment on the proposed change, BOEM's determination, and the documents. 17
148	iii. After the 30-calendar review period has concluded and no comments require additional consultation, Empire Wind will notify the signatories and consulting parties that BOEM has approved the project modification and, if they received any comments, provide a summary of the comments and BOEM's responses. iv. BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, will conduct any consultation meetings if requested by the signatories or consulting parties. v. This MOA will not need to be amended if no additional historic properties are identified and/or adversely affected. 2. If BOEM determines new adverse effects to historic properties will occur due to a Project Modification(s), BOEM with the assistance of Empire Wind will notify and consult with the signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties regarding BOEM's finding and the proposed measures to resolve the adverse effect(s) including the development of a new treatment plan(s) following the consultation process set forth in this Stipulation VII.A.2. i. Empire Wind will notify all signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties about this proposed modification, BOEM's determination, and the proposed resolution measures for the adverse effect(s). ii. The signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties will have 30 calendar days to review and comment on the adverse effect finding and the proposed resolution of adverse effect(s), including a draft treatment plan(s). iii. BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, will conduct additional consultation meetings, if necessary, during consultation on the adverse effect finding and during drafting and finalization of the treatment plan(s). iv. BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, will respond to the comments and make necessary edits to the documents. v. Empire Wind will send the revised draft final documents to the other signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties for review and comment during a 30-calendar day review and comment period. With this same submittal of draft final documents, Empire Wind will provide a summary of all the comments received on the documents and BOEM's responses. vi. BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, will respond to the comments on the draft final documents and make necessary edits to the documents. vii. Empire Wind will notify all the signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties that BOEM has approved the project modification and will provide the final document(s) including the final treatment plan(s) and a summary of comments and BOEM's responses to comments, if they receive any on the draft final documents, after BOEM has received concurrence from the New Jersey SHPO on the finding of new adverse effect(s), BOEM has accepted the final treatment plan(s), and BOEM has approved the Project modification. 3. If any of the signatories, invited signatories, or consulting parties object to determinations, findings, or resolutions made pursuant to these measures (Stipulation VII.A.1 and 2), BOEM will resolve any such objections pursuant to the dispute resolution process set forth Stipulation XIII. 18
149	"VIII. CURATION A. Collections from federal lands or the OCS: 1. Any archaeological materials removed from federal lands or the OCS as a result of the actions required by this MOA shall be curated in accordance with 36 CFR 79, ""Curation of Federally Owned and Administered Archaeological Collections,"" ACHP's ""Recommended Approach for Consultation on Recovery of Significant Information from Archaeological Sites"" published in the Federal Register (64 Fed. Reg. 27085-27087 (May 18, 1999)), or other provisions agreed to by the consulting parties and following applicable State guidelines. No excavation should be initiated before acceptance and approval of a curation plan. B. Collections from state, local government, and private lands: 1. Archaeological materials from state or local government lands in the APE and the records and documentation associated with these materials shall be curated within the state of their origin at a repository preferred by the SHPO, or an approved and certified repository, in accordance with the standards and guidelines required by the New Jersey SHPO for materials collected in New Jersey or required by the New York SHPO for materials collected in New York. Lands as described here may include the seafloor in state waters. No excavation should be initiated before acceptance and approval of a curation plan. 2. Collections from private lands that would remain private property: In cases where archaeological survey and testing are conducted on private land, any recovered collections remain the property of the land owner. In such instances, BOEM and Empire Wind, in coordination with the New Jersey SHPO or the New York SHPO as appropriate based on which state these materials are located, and affected Tribe(s), will encourage land owners to donate the collection(s) to an appropriate public or Tribal entity. To the extent a private landowner requests that the materials be removed from the site, Empire Wind will seek to have the materials donated to the repository identified under Stipulation VII.B.1 through a written donation agreement developed in consultation with the consulting parties. BOEM, assisted by Empire Wind, will seek to have all materials from each state curated together in the same curation facility within the state of origin. In cases where the property owner wishes to transfer ownership of the collection(s) to a public or Tribal entity, BOEM and Empire Wind will ensure that recovered artifacts and related documentation are curated in a suitable repository as agreed to by BOEM, the appropriate SHPO, and affected Tribe(s), and following applicable State guidelines. To the extent feasible, the materials and records resulting from the actions required by this MOA for private lands, shall be curated in accordance with 36 CFR 79. No excavation should be initiated before acceptance and approval of a curation. IX. PROFESSIONAL QUALIFICATIONS A. Secretary's Standards for Archaeology and Historic Preservation. Empire will ensure that all work carried out pursuant to this MOA will meet the SOI Standards for Archaeology and Historic Preservation, 48 FR 44716 (September 29, 1983), taking into account the suggested approaches to new construction in the SOI's Standards for Rehabilitation. B. SOI Professional Qualifications Standards. Empire will ensure that all work carried out pursuant to this MOA is performed by or under the direction supervision of historic preservation professionals who meet the SOI's Professional Qualifications Standards (48 FR 44738-44739). A 19"
150	"""qualified professional"" is a person who meets the relevant standards outlined in such SOI's Standards. BOEM, or its designee, will ensure that consultants retained for services pursuant to the MOA meet these standards. C. Investigations of ASLFs. Empire will ensure that the additional investigations of ASLFs will be conducted and reports and other materials produced by one or more qualified marine archaeologists and geological specialists who meet the SOI's Professional Qualifications Standards and has experience both in conducting High Resolution Geophysical (HRG) surveys and processing and interpreting the resulting data for archaeological potential, as well as collecting, subsampling, and analyzing cores. D. Tribal Consultation Experience. Empire will ensure that all work carried out pursuant to this MOA that requires consultation with Tribes is performed by professionals who have demonstrated professional experience consulting with federally recognized Tribes. X. DURATION A. This MOA will expire at (1) the decommissioning of the Project in the lease area, as defined in Empire's lease with BOEM (Lease Number OCS-A 0512) or (2) 25-years from the date of COP approval, whichever occurs first. Prior to such time, BOEM may consult with the other signatories and invited signatories to reconsider the terms of the MOA and amend it in accordance with Amendment Stipulation (Stipulation XIV). XI. POST-REVIEW DISCOVERIES A. Implementation of Post-Review Discovery Plans. If properties are discovered that may be historically significant or have unanticipated effects on historic properties found, BOEM shall implement the post-review discovery plans found in Attachment 7 (Empire Wind Post-Review Discoveries Plan for Submerged Cultural Resources) and Attachment 8 (Empire Wind Terrestrial Post-Review Discovery Plan). 1. The signatories acknowledge and agree that it is possible that additional historic properties may be discovered during the implementation of the Project, despite the completion of a good faith effort to identify historic properties throughout the APEs. B. All Post-Review Discoveries. In the event of a post-review discovery of a property or unanticipated effects to a historic property prior to or during construction, operation, maintenance, or decommissioning of the Project, Empire will implement the following actions which are consistent with the post-review discovery plan: 1. Immediately halt all ground- or seafloor-disturbing activities within the area of discovery; 2. Notify BOEM in writing via report within 72 hours of the discovery; 3. Keep the location of the discovery confidential and take no action that may adversely affect the discovered property until BOEM or its designee has made an evaluation and instructs Empire on how to proceed; and 4. Conduct any additional investigations as directed by BOEM or its designee to determine if the resource is eligible for listing in the NRHP (30 CFR 585.802(b)). BOEM will direct Empire Wind to complete additional investigations, as BOEM deems appropriate, if: i. The site has been impacted by Empire Project activities, or 20"
151	ii. impacts to the site from Empire Project activities cannot be avoided. 5. If investigations indicate that the resource is eligible for the NRHP, BOEM, with the assistance of Empire, will work with the other relevant signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties to this MOA who have a demonstrated interest in the affected historic property and on the further avoidance, minimization or mitigation of adverse effects. 6. If there is any evidence that the discovery is from an indigenous society or appears to be a preserved burial site, Empire will contact the Tribes as identified in the notification lists included in the post-review discovery plans within 72 hours of the discovery with details of what is known about the discovery, and consult with the Tribes pursuant to the post review discovery plan. 7. If BOEM incurs costs in addressing the discovery, under Section 110(g) of the NHPA, BOEM may charge Empire reasonable costs for carrying out historic preservation responsibilities, pursuant to its delegated authority under the OCS Lands Act (30 CFR 585.802 (c-d)). XII. MONITORING AND REPORTING At the beginning of each calendar year by January 31, following the execution of this MOA until it expires or is terminated, Empire will prepare and, following BOEM's review and agreement to share this summary report, provide all signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties to this MOA a summary report detailing work undertaken pursuant to the MOA. Such report shall include a description of how the stipulations relating to avoidance and minimization measures (Stipulations I and II) were implemented; any scheduling changes proposed; any problems encountered; and any disputes and objections received in BOEM's efforts to carry out the terms of this MOA. Empire can satisfy its reporting requirement under this stipulation by providing the relevant portions of the annual compliance certification required under 30 CFR 585.633. XIII. DISPUTE RESOLUTION A. Should any signatory, invited signatory, or consulting party to this MOA object at any time to any actions proposed or the manner in which the terms of this MOA are implemented, they must notify BOEM in writing of their objection. BOEM shall consult with such party to resolve the objection. If BOEM determines that such objection cannot be resolved, BOEM will: 1. Forward all documentation relevant to the dispute, including the BOEM's proposed resolution, to the ACHP. The ACHP shall provide BOEM with its advice on the resolution of the objection within 30 calendar days of receiving adequate documentation. Prior to reaching a final decision on the dispute, BOEM shall prepare a written response that takes into account any timely advice or comments regarding the dispute from the ACHP, signatories, invited signatories, and/or consulting parties, and provide them with a copy of this written response. BOEM will make a final decision and proceed accordingly. 2. If the ACHP does not provide its advice regarding the dispute within the 30 calendar-day time period, BOEM may make a final decision on the dispute and proceed accordingly. Prior to reaching such a final decision, BOEM shall prepare a written response that takes into account any timely comments regarding the dispute from the signatories, invited signatories, or consulting parties to the MOA, and provide them and the ACHP with a copy of such written response. 21
152	B. BOEM's responsibility to carry out all other actions subject to the terms of this MOA that are not the subject of the dispute remain unchanged. C. At any time during the implementation of the measures stipulated in this MOA, should a member of the public object in writing to the signatories regarding the manner in which the measures stipulated in this MOA are being implemented, that signatory will notify BOEM.