6 = Dominates view; strong contrasts in form, line, color, texture, luminance, or motion fill most of the horizontal field of view (FOV) or vertical field of view (FOV) (NAEP 2012) M-21
28 Empire Offshore Wind Appendix M Draft Environmental Impact Statement Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impact Assessment Table M-15 Empire Wind and Other Planned Wind Farms' Seascape, Open Ocean, and Landscape Units Cumulative Wind Farm Distances, FOVs, Noticeable Elements, Visual Contrasts, Scale of Change, and Prominence Distance in miles (kilometers)2,3 FOV Noticeable Contrast, Scale of Change, and Prominence Character Unit Degrees Elements4 & Empire Wind, Empire Wind, Empire Wind, Empire Wind, Atlantic Shores North, Ocean Winds East, Attentive Energy, Bight Wind Holdings (% of 124) Impact Level Form Line Color Texture Scale Prominence5 Form Line Color Texture Scale Prominence New Jersey's 21.5 (34.3) 47.6 63.6 41.9 (67.4) 53.7 60.5 129 (104%) rotor, navigation light, nacelle, hub Moderate Weak Moderate Weak Medium Same as Same as Seascape (76.6) (102.4) (86.4) (97.4) Proposed Proposed (Beaches) Action Action Open Ocean 0.0 to 40.5 0.0 to 40.5 0.0 to 40.5 0.0 to 40.5 0.0 to 40.5 0.0 to 40.5 109 to 360 rotor, navigation light, nacelle, hub, onshore, mid-tower light, Strong to Strong to Strong to Strong to Large to Same as Same as (0.0 to 65.2) (0 to 65.2) (0 to 65.2) (0 to 65.2) (0 to 65.2) (0 to 65.2) (88 to 290%) yellow to rotor Weak Weak Weak Weak Small Proposed Proposed Major to Minor Action Action New Jersey's 21.7 (34.6) 47.8 63.8 42.1 (67.7) 53.9 60.7 129 (104%) rotor, navigation light, nacelle, hub Moderate Weak Moderate Weak Medium Same as Same as Landscape6 (76.9) (102.7) (86.7) (97.7) Proposed Proposed Action Action New York's 14.1 (22.7) 65.3 54.9 32.3 (52.0) 54.7 64.9 49 (39%) rotor, navigation light, nacelle, hub, mid-tower light, onshore Strong Moderate Strong Moderate Medium Same as Same as Seascape (105.1) (88.4) (88.0) (104.4) Major Proposed Proposed (Beaches)1 Action Action New York's 14.3 (23.0) 65.5 55.1 32.5 (52.3) 54.9 65.1 49 (39%) rotor, navigation light, nacelle, hub, mid-tower light, onshore Strong Moderate Strong Moderate Medium Same as Same as Landscape6 (105.4) (88.7) (88.3) (104.7) Major Proposed Proposed Action Action 1 The most conservative onshore case involves the seaward edge of the beach nearest the projects. The seascape unit edge is 3.45 miles (5.55 kilometers) offshore (New Jersey and New York jurisdictional boundaries). New Jersey's nearest beach (Sea Bright Beach) is 25.1 miles (40.1 kilometers) distant and New York's nearest beach (Jones Beach) is 14.1 miles (22.7 kilometers) distant from the Projects. 2 Attentive Energy = Attentive Energy LLC; Atlantic Shores North = Atlantic Shores North; Bight Wind Holdings = Bight Wind Holdings; Empire Wind = Empire Wind; Ocean Winds East = Ocean Winds East LLC; Vineyard Mid-Atlantic = Vineyard Mid-Atlantic LLC 3 Due to elevation camera and known wind turbine generator (WTG) heights, those WTGs beyond 40.5 miles (65.2 kilometers) would not be visible from ground level plus 5.5 feet (1.7 meters). 4 Noticeable elements: rotor = rotor, navigation light = navigation light, nacelle = nacelle, hub = hub, onshore = onshore, mid-tower light = mid-tower light, yellow = yellow tower base color 5 WTGs and onshore (onshore) visibility: 0 = Not visible. 1 = Visible only after extended study; otherwise not visible. 2 = Visible when viewing in general direction of the wind farm; otherwise likely to be missed by casual observer. 3 = Visible after brief glance in general direction of the wind farm; unlikely to be missed by casual observer. 4 = Plainly visible; could not be missed by casual observer, but does not strongly attract visual attention or dominate view. 5 = Strongly attracts viewers' attention to the wind farm; moderate to strong contrasts in form, line, color, or texture, luminance, or motion. 6 = Dominates view; strong contrasts in form, line, color, texture, luminance, or motion fill most of the horizontal field of view or vertical field of view (NAEP 2012). 6 The seaward edge between landscape and seascape varies. The most conservative case is 0.2-mile (0.3-kilometer) distance from seaward beach edge. M-22
29 Empire Offshore Wind Appendix M Draft Environmental Impact Statement Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impact Assessment Table M-16 Empire Wind and Other Planned Wind Farms' Cumulative Viewer Experience Wind Farm Distances, FOVs, Noticeable Elements, Visual Contrasts, Scale of Change, and Prominence Distance in miles (kilometers)2,3 FOV Contrast, Scale of Change, and Prominence Noticeable Elements4 Viewer Degrees Empire Wind, Empire Wind, Empire Wind, Empire Wind, Atlantic Shores North, Ocean Winds East, Vineyard Mid-Atlantic, Attentive Energy, Bight Wind Holdings & Impact Level Form Line Color Texture Scale Prominence5 (% of 124) Form Line Color Texture Scale Prominence KOP-3 21.8 (35.1) 76.5 45.7 24.0 55.7 67.1 61 (49%) rotor, navigation light, nacelle, hub, onshore, and mid-tower light Strong Moderate Strong Moderate Large Same as Same as (123.1) (73.5) (38.6) (89.6) (108.0) Major Proposed Proposed Action Action KOP-7 14.1 (22.7) 65.3 54.9 32.3 54.7 64.9 49 (39%) rotor, navigation light, nacelle, hub, mid-tower light, onshore Strong Moderate Strong Moderate Medium Same as Same as (105.1) (88.4) (52.0) (88.0) (104.4) Major Proposed Proposed Action Action KOP-12 25.4 (40.9) 37.7 61.5 41.9 48.2 54.1 129 (104%) rotor, navigation light, nacelle, hub Moderate Weak Moderate Weak Medium Same as Same as (60.7) (99.0) (67.4) (77.6) (87.1) Moderate Proposed Proposed Action Action KOP-13 30.7 (49.4) 30.1 61.4 44.1 45.7 50.1 138 (112%) rotor, navigation light, nacelle, hub Moderate Weak Moderate Weak Medium Same as Same as (48.4) (98.8) (71.0) (73.5) (80.6) Moderate Proposed Proposed Action Action 1 KOP-3 Fire Island Lighthouse (elevated view), KOP-7 Jones Beach State Park, KOP-12 Ocean Grove Beach, and KOP-13 Point Pleasant Beach 2 Attentive Energy = Attentive Energy LLC; Atlantic Shores North = Atlantic Shores North; Bight Wind Holdings = Bight Wind Holdings; Empire Wind = Empire Wind; Ocean Winds East = Ocean Winds East LLC; Vineyard Mid-Atlantic = Vineyard Mid-Atlantic LLC 3 Due to elevation camera and known wind turbine generator heights, those wind turbine generators beyond 40.5 miles (65.2 kilometers) would not be visible from ground level plus 5.5 feet (1.7 meters). 4 Noticeable elements: rotor = rotor, navigation light = navigation light, nacelle = nacelle, hub = hub, onshore = onshore, mid-tower light = mid-tower light, yellow = yellow tower base color 5 Wind turbine generators and onshore (onshore) visibility: 0 = Not visible. 1 = Visible only after extended study; otherwise not visible. 2 = Visible when viewing in general direction of the wind farm; otherwise likely to be missed by casual observer. 3 = Visible after brief glance in general direction of the wind farm; unlikely to be missed by casual observer. 4 = Plainly visible; could not be missed by casual observer, but does not strongly attract visual attention or dominate view. 5 = Strongly attracts viewers' attention to the wind farm; moderate to strong contrasts in form, line, color, or texture, luminance, or motion. 6 = Dominates view; strong contrasts in form, line, color, texture, luminance, or motion fill most of the horizontal field of view or vertical field of view (NAEP 2012). M-23
30 Empire Offshore Wind Appendix M Draft Environmental Impact Statement Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impact Assessment This page intentionally left blank. M-24
31 Empire Offshore Wind Appendix M Draft Environmental Impact Statement Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impact Assessment M.3.2 Impacts of Alternative B on Scenic and Visual Resources Visual contrast assessments and form, line, color, and texture comparisons of characteristics of the seascape, open ocean, and landscape before and after implementation of Alternative B are indicated in Table M-5. There would be a slight difference in contrasts between Alternative B and the Proposed Action due to alteration of the turbine array layout. Table M-17 and Table M-18 list Alternative B wind farm width-, height-, and distance-related occupation of views from the nearest shoreline area. Distance and FOV comparisons with the Proposed Action indicate similar effects, varying by 3.1 miles (5 kilometers) and the horizontal field of views would vary by 3. The vertical field of views would vary by less than 1 (0.1 variation) of the viewer field of view. These results indicate slight changes to the field of view results compared to the Proposed Action (Table M-3 and Table M-4). Table M-17 Horizontal Field of View Occupied by Alternative B Noticeable Width Distance Horizontal Percent of Human field of view Element miles (km) miles (km) field of view field of view Wind turbine generators 22.5 (36.2) 14.1 (22.7) 57.9 124 47% 1 Maximum extent of the wind farm array. 2 Nearest onshore distance to the wind farm array. km = kilometers Table M-18 Vertical field of view Occupied by Alternative B Height Visible Noticeable Distance Vertical Human Percent feet (m) Height Element miles (km) field of view field of view of field of view Mean Lower Low Water feet (m) Rotor Blade Tip 951 (289.9) 14.1 (22.7) 865 (264) 0.6 55 1% 1 Based on intervening elevation camera, clear-day, and clear-night conditions. km = kilometers; m = meters M.3.2.1. Conclusion The effects of Alternative B on seascape character, open ocean character, landscape character, and viewer experience would be similar to the effects of the Proposed Action. Due to distance, extensive field of views, high view prominence, strong contrasts, and heretofore undeveloped ocean views, Alternative B would have major effects on the open ocean unit character and viewer boating and cruise ship experiences. Due to view distances, moderate field of views, moderate and weak visual contrasts, clear-day conditions, and nighttime Aviation Detection Lighting System activation, effects of Alternative B on high- and moderate-sensitivity landscape character units would be moderate to major. The daytime presence of offshore wind turbine generators and onshore, as well as their nighttime lighting, would change perception of ocean scenes from natural and undeveloped to a developed wind energy environment characterized by wind turbine generators and onshore. In clear weather, the wind turbine generators and onshore would be an unavoidable presence in views from the coastline, with moderate to major effects on landscape character. Considering all the Impact-Producing Factors (IPFs) together, Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) anticipates that the contribution of Alternative B to the impacts associated with ongoing and planned activities in combination with other future offshore wind development would be major. The main drivers for this impact rating are the major visual impacts associated with the presence of offshore structures, lighting, and vessel traffic. M-25
32 Empire Offshore Wind Appendix M Draft Environmental Impact Statement Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impact Assessment M.3.3 Impacts of Alternative E on Scenic and Visual Resources The effects of Alternative E on seascape character, open ocean character, landscape character, and viewer experience would be similar to the effects of the Proposed Action. Alternative E would alter the turbine array layout compared to the Proposed Action; however, Alternative E would allow for installation of up to 147 wind turbine generators as defined in Empire Wind's Project Design Envelope (PDE). Table M-19 and Table M-20 list Alternative E wind farm width-, height-, and distance-related occupation of views from the nearest shoreline area. Distance and field of view comparisons would be the same as those of the Proposed Action. The vertical field of views would be the same as for the Proposed Action. Impacts of Alternative E related to the primary Impact-Producing Factors (presence of structures, lighting, vessel traffic, land disturbance, and accidental releases) would be similar to the impacts described for the Proposed Action. The seascape character units, open ocean character unit, landscape character units, and viewer experience would be affected by construction, operations and maintenance (O&M), and decommissioning of Alternative E due to the noticeable elements, distance effects, field of view extents, view framing and intervening foregrounds, prominence, and contrast rating. Horizontal and vertical field of view extents (Table M-19 and Table M-20) of the Alternative E wind farm would be the same as for the Proposed Action (Table M-3 and Table M-4). Table M-19 Horizontal field of view Occupied by Alternative E Noticeable Width Distance Horizontal Human field of view Percent of field of view Element miles (km) miles (km) field of view Wind turbine generators 25.6 (41.2) 14.1 (22.7) 61.1 124 49% 1 Maximum extent of the wind farm array. 2 Nearest onshore distance to the wind farm array. km = kilometers Table M-20 Vertical field of view Occupied by Alternative E Height Visible Noticeable Distance Vertical Human Percent feet (m) Height Element miles (km) field of view field of view of field of view Mean Lower Low Water feet (m) Rotor Blade Tip 951 (289.9) 14.1 (22.7) 865 (264) 0.6 55 1% 1 Based on intervening elevation camera, clear-day, and clear-night conditions. km = kilometers; m = meters M.3.3.1. Conclusions The effects of Alternative E on seascape character, open ocean character, landscape character, and viewer experience would be similar to the effects of the Proposed Action. Due to distance, extensive field of views, high view prominence, strong contrasts, and heretofore undeveloped ocean views, Alternative E would have major effects on the open ocean unit character and viewer boating and cruise ship experiences. Due to view distances, moderate field of views, moderate and weak visual contrasts, clear-day conditions, and nighttime Aviation Detection Lighting System activation, effects of Alternative E on high- and moderate-sensitivity landscape character units would be moderate to major. The daytime presence of offshore wind turbine generators and onshore, as well as their nighttime lighting, would change perception of ocean scenes from natural and undeveloped to a developed wind energy environment characterized by wind turbine generators and onshore. In clear weather, the wind turbine generators and onshore would be an unavoidable presence in views from the coastline, with moderate to major effects on seascape and landward landscape character. M-26
33 Empire Offshore Wind Appendix M Draft Environmental Impact Statement Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impact Assessment Considering all the Impact-Producing Factors together, Bureau of Ocean Energy Management anticipates that the contribution of Alternative E to the impacts associated with ongoing and planned activities in combination with other future offshore wind development would be major. The main drivers for this impact rating are the major visual impacts associated with the presence of offshore structures, lighting, and vessel traffic. M.3.4 Impacts of Alternative F on Scenic and Visual Resources Table M-21 and Table M-22 list Alternative F wind farm width-, height-, and distance-related occupation of views from the nearest shoreline area. Distance and field of view comparisons with the Proposed Action indicate similar effects, varying by 3.1 miles (5 kilometers) and the horizontal field of views would vary by 3. The vertical field of views would vary by less than 1 of the viewer field of view. These results indicate slight changes to the field of view results compared to the Proposed Action (Table M-3 and Table M-4). Impacts of Alternative F related to the primary Impact-Producing Factors (presence of structures, lighting, vessel traffic, land disturbance, and accidental releases) would be similar to the impacts described for the Proposed Action. The seascape character units, open ocean character unit, landscape character units, and viewer experience would be affected by construction, operations and maintenance, and decommissioning of Alternative F due to the noticeable elements, distance effects, field of view extents, view framing and intervening foregrounds, prominence, and contrast rating effects. The effects of Alternative F on seascape character, open ocean character, landscape character, and viewer experience would be similar to the effects of the Proposed Action. Alternative F would alter the turbine array layout compared to the Proposed Action; however, Alternative F would allow for installation of up to 147 wind turbine generators as defined in Empire Wind's Project Design Envelope. Horizontal and vertical field of view extent (Table M-21 and Table M-22) differences between Alternative F and the Proposed Action (Table M-3 and Table M-4) would not be noticeable to the casual viewer at applicable seascape receptor distances to the wind turbine generator array. Table M-21 Horizontal field of view Occupied by Alternative F Noticeable Width Distance Horizontal Human field of view Percent of field of view Element miles (km) miles (km) field of view Wind turbine generators 24 (38.6) 14.1 (22.7) 59.6 124 48% 1 Maximum extent of the wind farm array. 2 Nearest onshore distance to the wind farm array. km = kilometers Table M-22 Vertical field of view Occupied by Alternative F Height Visible Noticeable Distance Vertical Human Percent feet (m) Height Element miles (km) field of view field of view of field of view Mean Lower Low Water feet (m) Rotor Blade Tip 951 (289.9) 14.1 (22.7) 865 (264) 0.6 55 1% 1 Based on intervening elevation camera, clear-day, and clear-night conditions. km = kilometers; m = meters M.3.4.1. Conclusions The effects of Alternative F on seascape character, open ocean character, landscape character, and viewer experience would be similar to the effects of the Proposed Action. Due to distance, extensive field of views, high view prominence, strong contrasts, and heretofore undeveloped ocean views, Alternative F would have major effects on the open ocean unit character and viewer boating and cruise ship experiences. Due to view distances, moderate field of views, moderate and weak visual contrasts, clear-day conditions, and nighttime M-27
34 Empire Offshore Wind Appendix M Draft Environmental Impact Statement Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impact Assessment Aviation Detection Lighting System activation, effects of Alternative F on high- and moderate-sensitivity landscape character units would be moderate to major. The daytime presence of offshore wind turbine generators and onshore, as well as their nighttime lighting, would change perception of ocean scenes from natural and undeveloped to a developed wind energy environment characterized by wind turbine generators and onshore. In clear weather, the wind turbine generators and onshore would be an unavoidable presence in views from the coastline, with moderate to major effects on seascape and landward landscape character. Considering all the Impact-Producing Factors together, Bureau of Ocean Energy Management anticipates that the contribution of Alternative F to the impacts associated with ongoing and planned activities in combination with other future offshore wind development would be major. The main drivers for this impact rating are the major visual impacts associated with the presence of offshore structures, lighting, and vessel traffic. M.3.5 Impacts of Alternatives C, D, G, and H on Scenic and Visual Resources Alternatives C, D, and G involve selection of specific submarine export cable or onshore export cable routes to avoid impacts on federally maintained anchorage area (Alternative C-1), navigation channel (Alternative C-2), or sand borrow areas (Alternative D), or use a cable bridge to cross Barnums Channel (Alternative G). Alternative H would use a method of dredge or fill activities (clamshell dredging with environmental bucket) that would reduce the discharge of dredged material compared to other dredging options considered in Empire Wind's Project Design Envelope (i.e., open cut trenching/jetting, suction hopper dredging, hydraulic dredging). None of these alternatives would add or modify above-water or aboveground infrastructure included in the Project Design Envelope for the Proposed Action and impacts of Alternatives C, D, G, or H on scenic and visual resources would be the same as described for the Proposed Action. Impacts of Alternatives C, D, G, or H related to the primary Impact-Producing Factors (presence of structures, lighting, vessel traffic, and accidental releases) would also be similar to the impacts described for the Proposed Action. M.3.5.1. Conclusions The effects of Alternatives C, D, G, or H on seascape character, open ocean character, landscape character, and viewer experience would be similar to the effects of the Proposed Action. Due to distance, extensive field of views, high view prominence, strong contrasts, and heretofore undeveloped ocean views, Alternatives C, D, G, or H would have major effects on the open ocean unit character and viewer boating and cruise ship experiences. Due to view distances, moderate field of views, moderate and weak visual contrasts, clear-day conditions, and nighttime Aviation Detection Lighting System activation, effects of Alternatives C, D, G, or H on high- and moderate-sensitivity seascape character units would be moderate to major. The daytime presence of offshore wind turbine generators and onshore, as well as their nighttime lighting, would change perception of ocean scenes from natural and undeveloped to a developed wind energy environment characterized by wind turbine generators and onshore. In clear weather, the wind turbine generators and onshore would be an unavoidable presence in views from the coastline, with moderate to major effects on seascape character. Considering all the Impact-Producing Factors together, Bureau of Ocean Energy Management anticipates that the contribution of Alternative C, D, G, or H to the impacts associated with ongoing and planned activities in combination with other future offshore wind development would be major. The main drivers for this impact rating are the major visual impacts associated with the presence of offshore structures, lighting, and vessel traffic. M.3.6 Impacts of the Connected Action on Scenic and Visual Resources View distances, facility scale, view prominence, and visual contrasts (form, line, color, and texture comparisons) of characteristics of the seascape and landscape before and after implementation of the South Brooklyn Marine Terminal (SBMT) staging facility are indicated in Table M-5.