BOEM is implementing the special set of requirements for protecting National Historic Landmarks (NHLs) and for compliance with National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) Section 110(f) at 36 CFR 800.10, which, in summary: requires the agency official, to the maximum extent possible, to undertake such planning and actions as may be necessary to minimize harm to any NHL that may be directly and adversely affected by an undertaking; requires the agency official to request the participation of Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP) in any consultation conducted under 36 CFR 800.6 to resolve adverse effects on NHLs; and further directs the agency to notify the Secretary of the Interior of any consultation involving an NHL and to invite the Secretary of the Interior to participate in consultation where there may be an adverse effect. The Historic Resources Visual Effects Assessment identified four NHLs in the visual Area of Potential Effect (APE) for the Projects: Green-Wood Cemetery, Cyclone Roller Coaster, Fort Hancock and Sandy Hook Proving Ground Historic District, and Sandy Hook Light (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022). BOEM has determined that only one of the four NHLs in the visual APE for the Projects, Sandy Hook Light (Gateway National Recreation Area, National Park Service unit), would be adversely affected by the Projects.

Green-Wood Cemetery (NR No. 97000228) was established in 1838. Green-Wood Cemetery is on 5th Avenue in Brooklyn, New York. Green-Wood Cemetery is one of the earliest and most elaborate remaining examples of rural or "garden" landscape cemeteries in the state. Green-Wood Cemetery's landscape was designed by Davis Bates Douglass, with cemetery architecture by Richard Upjohn & Sons. The 478-acre (193.4-hectare) Green-Wood Cemetery contains more than 600,000 burials, including notable individuals such as telegraphy inventor Samuel F.B. Morse, former New York Governor DeWitt Clinton, composer Leonard Bernstein, and painter Jean-Michel Basquiat. Green-Wood Cemetery was listed in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) in 1997 under Criterion C for Davis Bates Douglass' outstanding landscape design, the architecture of Richard Upjohn & Sons, and the sculptural quality of Green-Wood Cemetery's monuments. Green-Wood Cemetery was designated an NHL in 2006. Although the proposed onshore substation and Operations & Maintenance (O&M) facility would be partially visible from one of the highest topographic points of Green-Wood Cemetery, the proposed onshore substation and Operations & Maintenance (O&M) facility would be a minor middleground element in the built environment of the Gowanus Bay shoreline. As such, BOEM finds there would be No Adverse Effect on Green-Wood Cemetery (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:46-47).

The Cyclone Roller Coaster (NR No. 91000907) was built in 1927. The Cyclone Roller Coaster is at 834 Surf Avenue in Coney Island, Brooklyn, New York. The Cyclone Roller Coaster has a 3,000-foot track with a vertical drop of almost 100 feet. The Cyclone Roller Coaster was listed in the NRHP in 1991 under Criterion A for the Cyclone Roller Coaster's association with the development of seaside recreation during the early twentieth century and under Criterion C as an example of extreme engineering for a recreational purpose. The Cyclone Roller Coaster's period of significance is 1927-1941. The Cyclone Roller Coaster was designated an NHL in 1991. While the offshore components of the Projects would be viewable from the Cyclone Roller Coaster, ocean views were not an important consideration in the Cyclone Roller Coaster's design and siting. It was assessed that the Project-related visual effects would not diminish the significance of the character-defining criteria for which the Cyclone Roller Coaster was listed in the NRHP. As such, BOEM finds there would be No Adverse Effect on the Cyclone Roller Coaster (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:27-28).

The Fort Hancock and Sandy Hook Proving Ground Historic District (NR No. 80002505) is on the Sandy Hook peninsula in Middletown Township, New Jersey. From 1874 to 1919, the 380-acre Sandy Hook Proving Ground was used by the U.S. Army as a weapon testing area, including the testing of innovations such as rifling smooth-bore cannon, breech-loading guns, rapid-fire guns, and armor-piercing shot. Fort Hancock was constructed in 1895 and the first garrison of artillerists was stationed at Fort Hancock in 1898, as Fort Hancock became the principal fortification responsible for the defense of New York Harbor. The Fort Hancock and Sandy Hook Proving Ground Historic District was listed in the NRHP in 1980 under Criterion A as the key fortification guarding the approaches to New York Harbor and for the Fort Hancock and Sandy Hook Proving Ground Historic District's role in the development of weaponry used by the U.S. Coast Artillery and U.S. Field Artillery in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The Fort Hancock and Sandy Hook Proving Ground Historic District's period of significance is 1874-1919, when the weapon testing program was ended at Fort Hancock. The Fort Hancock and Sandy Hook Proving Ground Historic District was designated an NHL in 1982. While the Projects would be viewable from the Fort Hancock and Sandy Hook Proving Ground Historic District, views of the ocean were not a specific consideration in the Fort Hancock and Sandy Hook Proving Ground Historic District's design and siting. It was assessed that the Project-related visual effects would not diminish the significance of the character-defining criterion for which the Fort Hancock and Sandy Hook Proving Ground Historic District was listed in the NRHP. As such, BOEM finds there would be No Adverse Effect on the Fort Hancock and Sandy Hook Proving Ground Historic District (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:38).

Sandy Hook Light (NR No. 66000468) was constructed in 1764 and is the oldest extant lighthouse in the United States. The 103-foot Sandy Hook Light is a tapering octagonal brick tower topped with a cast iron lantern and catwalk. Owned by the National Park Service, Sandy Hook Light, which is in Gateway National Recreation Area, was listed in the NRHP in 1966 under Criterion A for Sandy Hook Light's association with the colonial program to construct maritime navigational aids along the eastern seaboard. Sandy Hook Light's period of significance is 1764-1799. Sandy Hook Light was designated as an NHL in 1964. Clear sightlines out to the Atlantic Ocean are an important characteristic of Sandy Hook Light's setting and purpose as an aid to maritime navigation. As the Projects would diminish this significant characteristic of Sandy Hook Light, BOEM finds there would be an Adverse Effect on Sandy Hook Light (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:38).

BOEM considered prudent and feasible alternatives to avoid adverse effects on Sandy Hook Light, applying The Secretary of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines for Federal Agency Historic Preservation Programs Pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act (NPS 2013), which is presented by the National Park Service Federal Preservation Institute under Standard 4 as such: Where such alternatives appear to require undue cost or to compromise the undertaking's goals and objectives, BOEM must balance those goals and objectives with the intent of section 110(f). In doing so, BOEM should consider: (1) the magnitude of the undertaking's harm to the historical, archaeological and cultural qualities of the NHL, (2) the public interest in the NHL and in the undertaking as proposed, and, (3) the effect a mitigation action would have on meeting the goals and objectives of the undertaking.

BOEM considered seven alternatives to the Proposed Action. Among these, Alternative B considered removal of select Wind Turbine Generator (WTG) positions from development within the Lease Area for the purpose of reducing visual impacts in balance with the undertaking's goals and objectives. While the WTGs identified for removal under Alternative B are those closest to shore and the removal of the WTGs could lessen the visual impact of the wind farm on Sandy Hook Light, the overall visual impact of the wind farm would still result in an adverse effect on Sandy Hook Light.

BOEM has planned and is taking action to minimize harm, as required by NHPA Section 110(f) at 36 CFR 800.10, to Sandy Hook Light. Descriptions of actions to minimize or mitigate adverse effects on Sandy Hook Light are summarized in Section N.6 and are discussed in greater detail in Attachment A, Memorandum of Agreement.

Actions to minimize visual adverse effects on Sandy Hook Light include using non-reflective white and light gray paint on offshore structures (i.e., WTGs and Offshore Substations (OSS)) and using navigational lighting that minimizes the visibility of the WTGs and OSS. Measures to mitigate adverse effects on Sandy Hook Light may include funding for a structural survey of Sandy Hook Light or other activities identified through consultation. Implementation of a mitigation measure to resolve visual adverse effects on Sandy Hook Light would be compensatory and consistent with the nature, scope, size, and magnitude of visual impacts, including cumulative visual impacts, caused by the undertaking. In transmittal of this Finding of Adverse Effect document to the National Park Service, BOEM will specifically request National Park Service consulting party points of contact provide input from National Park Service's NHL Program pursuant to 36 CFR 800.10I, to which the Secretary of the Interior has delegated consultation authority, and will address this request to the NHL Program lead for the region.

N.6. Actions to Avoid, Minimize, or Mitigate Adverse Effects

BOEM will consult with federally recognized tribes, State Historic Preservation Offices (SHPOs), ACHP, and consulting parties to develop measures to avoid, minimize, or mitigate adverse effects for certain historic properties identified in the APE as adversely affected by the Projects. Specifically, BOEM's consultation will develop measures to avoid known terrestrial archaeological historic properties and marine historic properties (i.e., marine archaeological resources and ancient submerged landforms) and minimize visual effects on architectural historic properties. BOEM will also consult to develop mitigation measures that would be triggered in cases where avoidance of known ancient submerged landforms is not feasible.

The Projects' unanticipated discovery plan will include a consultation process to determine appropriate mitigation in cases where there is unanticipated discovery of a previously unknown terrestrial or marine archaeological resource that is not currently found to be subject to adverse effects from the Projects.

As part of the NRHP Section 106 process, Empire Offshore Wind, LLC (Empire) has committed to Avoidance, Preservation, and Minimization Strategies (APMs) as conditions for approval of issuance of BOEM's permit (Tetra Tech 2021b), including:

1. If avoidance of historic properties in the marine APE is not feasible, minimizing adverse effects by micro-siting Project components through recommended avoidance buffers while remaining outside of the historic properties' perimeters. Empire could propose a combination of onsite and offsite mitigation that would be applied to each marine historic property where adverse effects cannot be avoided or minimized. A marine archaeological resource treatment plan would be developed in consultation with the appropriate consulting parties with a nexus to the Projects.

2. Implementing the Unanticipated Marine Archaeological Resources Discoveries Plan (COP Volume 3, Appendix X; Empire 2022) to minimize or mitigate impacts on presently undiscovered marine cultural resources that could potentially be affected by Project construction. Implementation of the Unanticipated Marine Archaeological Resources Discoveries Plan would reduce potential impacts on undiscovered archaeological resources to a minor level by preventing further physical impacts on the archaeological resources encountered during construction.

3. As required by BOEM and deemed necessary by New York SHPO, conducting archaeological monitoring during construction in three locations on Barnum Island for Empire Wind Project 2 (EW 2) that have been previously determined to have a moderate potential for undiscovered archaeological resources. Archaeological monitoring would reduce potential impacts on undiscovered archaeological resources to a minor level by preventing further physical impacts on the archaeological resources encountered during construction. If archaeological resources or human remains are identified during Project construction, operations, or decommissioning, the onsite construction supervisor would stop work immediately and follow the protocols outlined in the Unanticipated Discoveries Plan. Terrestrial archaeological resources discovered during construction could be historic properties eligible for the NRHP and may experience adverse effects from the undertaking.

4. Developing and implementing an Unanticipated Discoveries Plan to minimize or mitigate impacts on presently undiscovered terrestrial archaeological resources that could potentially be affected by Project construction. Implementation of an Unanticipated Discoveries Plan would reduce potential impacts on undiscovered archaeological resources to a minor level by preventing further physical impacts on the archaeological resources encountered during construction.

5. Using non-reflective white and light gray paint on offshore structures (i.e., WTGs and OSS) to minimize their contrast with the sky in most atmospheric conditions.

6. Using navigational lighting that minimizes the visibility of the WTGs and OSS without compromising safety. This strategy may include limiting the amount of lighting and time duration to the minimum allowable by Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and United States Coast Guard (USCG), such as the implementation of an Aircraft Detection Lighting System (ADLS).

7. Funding mitigation measures to resolve adverse effects on the West Bank Light Station in Staten Island, New York; Breezy Point Surf Club Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit) in Rockaway, Queens, New York; Silver Gull Beach Club Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit) in Rockaway, Queens, New York; Jacob Riis Park Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit) in Rockaway, Queens, New York; Jones Beach State Park, Parkway and Causeway System, Hempstead/Oyster Bay, New York; Robert Moses State Park in Babylon/Islip, New York; Fire Island Lighthouse in Islip, New York; Fire Island Light Station Historic District in Islip, New York; Carrington House in Brook Haven, New York; Point O'Woods Historic District in Islip, New York; Romer Shoal Light Station in Lower New York Bay, New Jersey; Sandy Hook Light, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit) in Middleton, New Jersey; Fort Hancock, U.S. Life Saving Station, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit) in Highlands, New Jersey; Allenhurst Residential Historic District in Allenhurst, New Jersey; Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association District in Ocean Grove, New Jersey; and Water Witch (Monmouth Hills) Historic District in Middleton, New Jersey. These measures are further described in Appendix H, Table H-1.

The NHPA Section 106 consultation process is ongoing for the Projects and will culminate in a Memorandum of Agreement (Attachment A) detailing avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures to resolve adverse effects on historic properties. BOEM will continue to consult in good faith with the New York and New Jersey SHPOs and other consulting parties to resolve adverse effects.

N.7. Phased Identification

Information pertaining to identification of historic properties within portions of the offshore visual APE will not be available until after the Final Environmental Impact Statement (EIS). Section 106 regulations at 36 CFR 800.4 (b)(2) provide for phased identification of historic properties. Typically, phased identification is implemented for projects where alternatives under consideration consist of corridors or large land areas, or where access to properties is restricted. Phasing Section 106 adjusts the standard Section 106 timeline so that identification and evaluation of historic properties may be completed after completing environmental review of the Projects, but before project implementation occurs.

The Historic Resources Visual Effects Assessment report will be updated following completion of additional survey prior to the Record of Decision (ROD) and execution of the Memorandum of Agreement consistent with the Empire Offshore Wind: Empire Wind Projects (Empire Wind Project 1 (EW 1) and Empire Wind Project 2 (EW 2)), Section 106 Phased Identification Plan (Tetra Tech 2022). Phased identification survey efforts within the offshore visual APE will be focused on locations within 0.5 mile of the shoreline in New Jersey and elevated viewpoints in New York where viewshed modeling has identified potential for visibility to the Projects.

BOEM will use the Memorandum of Agreement to establish commitments for phased identification and evaluation of historic properties within the offshore visual APE in accordance with BOEM's existing Guidelines for Providing Archaeological and Historic Property Information Pursuant to Title 30 Code of Federal Regulations Part 585, ensuring potential historic properties are identified, effects assessed, and adverse effects resolved prior to construction; reviewing the sufficiency of these report updates as phased identification and evaluation of historic properties; amending the APE; and consulting on the post-ROD finding of effects. See Attachment A. The Memorandum of Agreement will specify the Section 106 consultation process for phased identification (see Attachment A, Stipulation IV).

Empire Wind will be required to complete surveys for portions of the offshore visual APE that require phased identification. BOEM will review the results of these surveys and, after BOEM's final agreement that these surveys and survey results are sufficient, BOEM will make a finding of effect. If BOEM identifies no additional historic properties or determines that no historic properties are adversely affected, BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, will notify and consult with the signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties. BOEM and Empire Wind will allow the signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties 30 calendar days to review and comment on the proposed change, BOEM's determination, and the documents. After the 30-calendar review period has concluded and no comments require additional consultation, Empire Wind will notify the signatories and consulting parties that BOEM has received concurrence from the New Jersey SHPO regarding the finding of effect and, if BOEM received any comments, provide a summary of the comments and BOEM's responses.

BOEM will review the results of these surveys and, after BOEM's final agreement that these surveys and survey results are sufficient, BOEM will make a finding of effect. If BOEM identifies no additional historic properties or determines that no historic properties are adversely affected, BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, will notify and consult with the signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties. BOEM and Empire Wind will allow the signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties 30 calendar days to review and comment on the proposed change, BOEM's determination, and the documents. After the 30-calendar-day review period has concluded and no comments require additional consultation, Empire Wind will notify the signatories and consulting parties that BOEM has received concurrence from the New Jersey SHPO regarding the finding of effect and, if BOEM received any comments, provide a summary of the comments and BOEM's responses.

BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, will conduct any consultation meetings if requested by the signatories or consulting parties. If BOEM determines new adverse effects on historic properties will occur based on the results of the phased identification surveys, BOEM with the assistance of Empire Wind will notify and consult with the signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties regarding BOEM's finding and the proposed measures to resolve the adverse effect(s) including the development of a new treatment plan(s) following the consultation process set forth in the Memorandum of Agreement. Empire Wind will notify all signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties about the results of the surveys and copies of the survey reports, BOEM's determination, and the proposed resolution measures for the adverse effect(s). The signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties will have 30 calendar days to review and comment on the survey reports, the results of the survey reports, the adverse effect finding, and the proposed resolution of adverse effect(s), including a draft treatment plan(s). BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, will conduct additional consultation meetings, if necessary, during consultation on the adverse effect finding and during drafting and finalization of the treatment plan(s). BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, will respond to the comments and make necessary edits to the documents. Empire Wind will send the revised draft final documents to the other signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties for review and comment during a 30-calendar-day review and comment period. With this same submittal of draft final documents, Empire Wind will provide a summary of all the comments received on the documents and BOEM's responses. 

BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, will respond to the comments on the draft final documents and make necessary edits to the documents. Empire Wind will notify all the signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties and will provide the final document(s) including the final treatment plan(s) and a summary of comments and BOEM's responses to comments, if BOEM receives any on the draft final documents, after BOEM has received concurrence from the New Jersey SHPO and New York SHPO on the finding of new adverse effect(s), and BOEM has accepted the final treatment plan(s). 

The approach will be in accordance with BOEM's existing Guidelines for Providing Archaeological and Historic Property Information Pursuant to Title 30 Code of Federal Regulations Part 585 and ensure potential historic properties are identified, effects assessed, and adverse effects resolved prior to construction. If BOEM determines new adverse effects on historic properties will occur based on the results of the phased identification surveys, BOEM with the assistance of Empire Wind will notify and consult with the signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties regarding BOEM's finding and the proposed measures to resolve the adverse effect(s) including the development of a new treatment plan(s) following the consultation process set forth in the Memorandum of Agreement. Empire Wind will notify all signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties about the results of the surveys and copies of the survey reports, BOEM's determination, and the proposed resolution measures for the adverse effect(s). The signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties will have 30 calendar days to review and comment on the survey reports, the results of the survey reports, the adverse effect finding, and the proposed resolution of adverse effect(s), including a draft treatment plan(s). BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, will conduct additional consultation meetings, if necessary, during consultation on the adverse effect finding and during drafting and finalization of the treatment plan(s). BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, will respond to the comments and make necessary edits to the documents. Empire Wind will send the revised draft final documents to the other signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties for review and comment during a 30-calendar-day review and comment period. With this same submittal of draft final documents, Empire Wind will provide a summary of all the comments received on the documents and BOEM's responses. BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, will respond to the comments on the draft final documents and make necessary edits to the documents. Empire Wind will notify all the signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties and will provide the final document(s) including the final treatment plan(s) and a summary of comments and BOEM's responses to comments, if BOEM receives any on the draft final documents, after BOEM has received concurrence from the New Jersey SHPO and New York SHPO on the finding of new adverse effect(s), and BOEM has accepted the final treatment plan(s). 

N.8. References Cited

Bureau of Ocean and Energy Management (BOEM). 2020. Guidelines for Providing Archaeological and Historic Property Information Pursuant to 30 CFR Part 585. May. Available: https://www.boem.gov/sites/default/files/documents/about-boem/Archaeology%20and%20Historic%20Property%20Guidelines.pdf.

Bureau of Ocean and Energy Management (BOEM). 2021. Empire Wind Construction and Operations Plan Scoping Report. August. Sterling, VA. Prepared for U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Ocean and Energy Management, Office of Renewable Energy Programs.

Bureau of Ocean and Energy Management (BOEM). 2022. Cumulative Historic Resources Visual Effects Analysis for the Empire Wind Project (EW 1 and EW 2). October.

Empire Offshore Wind, LLC (Empire). 2022. Empire Offshore Wind: Empire Wind Project (EW1 and EW2), Construction and Operations Plan. May. Available: https://www.boem.gov/renewable-energy/empire-wind-construction-and-operations-plan.

National Park Service (NPS). 2013.