Federal Preservation Institute, Section 110 of the National Historic Preservation Act, The Secretary of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines for Federal Agency Historic Preservation Programs Pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act. Available: https://www.nps.gov/fpi/Section110.html. New York City Economic Development Corporation (NYCEDC). 2021. South Brooklyn Marine Terminal Port Infrastructure Improvement Project, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers/New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) Joint Permit Application. USACE Pre- Application # NAN-2021-01201-EMI. December. Tetra Tech. 2021a. Empire Offshore Wind: Empire Wind Project (EW 1 and EW 2) EW 2 Onshore Substation C Characterization Report. October. Boston, MA. Prepared for Empire Offshore Wind, LLC, Stamford, CT. Tetra Tech. 2021b. Empire Offshore Wind: Empire Wind Project (EW1 and EW2), Proposed Avoidance, Minimization and Mitigation to Support BOEM Section 106 Consultation. December. Boston, MA. Prepared for Empire Offshore Wind, LLC, Stamford, CT. Tetra Tech. 2022. Empire Offshore Wind: Empire Wind Project (EW1 and EW2), Section 106 Phased Identification Plan. December. Boston, MA. Prepared for Empire Offshore Wind, LLC, Stamford, CT. Tomkins, Michael. 2004. Water Witch Club Historic District National Register of Historic Places Registration Form. March 12. NPS Ref. No. 04000147. N-45
128	Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP This page intentionally left blank. N-46
129	Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP ATTACHMENT A MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
130	Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP This page intentionally left blank. 131	DRAFT MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT AMONG THE BUREAU OF OCEAN ENERGY MANAGEMENT, THE NEW JERSEY STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER, THE NEW YORK STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER, AND THE ADVISORY COUNCIL ON HISTORIC PRESERVATION REGARDING THE EMPIRE WIND OFFSHORE WIND FARM PROJECTS WHEREAS, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) plans to authorize construction and operation of the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Projects (Projects), which consist of the EW 1 and EW 2, pursuant to Section 8(p)(1)(C) of the Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1337(p)(1)(C)), as amended by the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (Public Law No. 109-58) and in accordance with Renewable Energy Regulations at 30 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 585; and WHEREAS, BOEM determined that the Projects constitute an undertaking subject to Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA), as amended (54 USC 306108), and its implementing regulations (36 CFR 800), and consistent with the Programmatic Agreement (PA) regarding the review of OCS renewable energy activities offshore New Jersey and New York (Programmatic Agreement Among The U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, The State Historic Preservation Officers of New Jersey and New York, The Shinnecock Indian Nation, and The Advisory Council on Historic Preservation Regarding Review of Outer Continental Shelf Renewable Energy Activities Offshore New Jersey and New York Under Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act); and WHEREAS, BOEM plans to approve with conditions the Construction and Operations Plan (COP) submitted by Empire Offshore Wind, LLC (Empire); and WHEREAS, BOEM determined the construction, operation, maintenance, and eventual decommissioning of the Projects, planned for up to 147 offshore Wind Turbine Generators (WTGs), up to two offshore substations, three onshore substations, offshore and onshore export cables, could potentially adversely affect historic properties as defined under 36 CFR 800.16(l); and WHEREAS, BOEM is preparing an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the Projects pursuant to the National Environmental Policy Act (42 USC 4321 et seq.) (NEPA) and elected to use the NEPA substitution process with its Section 106 consultation pursuant to 36 CFR 800.8(c); and WHEREAS, BOEM notified in advance the New Jersey State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO), New York SHPO, and the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP) on April 29, 2021 of their decision to use NEPA substitution and followed the standards for developing environmental documents to comply with the Section 106 consultation for this Project pursuant to 36 CFR 800.8(c), and ACHP responded with acknowledgement on May 12, 2021; and WHEREAS, in accordance with 36 CFR 800.3, BOEM invited New Jersey SHPO and New York SHPO to consult on the Project on April 29, 2021, and New Jersey SHPO accepted on May 26, 2021, and New York SHPO accepted on May 5, 2021; and WHEREAS, in accordance with 36 CFR 800.3, BOEM invited ACHP to consult on the Project on April 29, 2021, and ACHP accepted on May 12, 2021; and WHEREAS, the Project is within a commercial lease area subject to the previous NHPA Section 106 review by BOEM regarding the issuance of the commercial lease and approval of site assessment activities. Both Section 106 reviews for the lease issuance and the approval of the site assessment plan were conducted pursuant to the PA and concluded with No Historic Properties Affected on December 16, 2016. 1
132	WHEREAS, consistent with 36 CFR 800.16(d) and BOEM's Guidelines for Providing Archaeological and Historic Property Information Pursuant to 30 CFR Part 585 (May 27, 2020), BOEM defined the area of potential effects (APE) for the undertaking as the depth and breadth of the seabed potentially impacted by any bottom-disturbing activities, constituting the marine archaeological resources portion of the APE (marine APE); the depth and breadth of terrestrial areas potentially impacted by any ground disturbing activities, constituting the terrestrial archaeological resources portion of the APE (terrestrial APE); the viewshed from which offshore or onshore renewable energy structures would be visible, constituting the viewshed portion of the APE (viewshed APE); and any temporary or permanent construction or staging areas that may fall into any of the aforementioned offshore or onshore portions of the APE (see Attachment 1 APE Maps); and WHEREAS, BOEM identified 15 historic districts and 25 aboveground historic properties in the offshore Project components' portion of the viewshed APE and one historic district and three historic properties in the onshore Project components' portion of the viewshed APE; thirty submerged historic properties and twenty-two ancient submerged landforms and features (ASLFs) in the marine APE; and no historic properties in the terrestrial APE; and WHEREAS, BOEM identified three National Historic Landmarks (NHLs) in the offshore Project components' portion of the viewshed APE, Cyclone Roller Coaster, Fort Hancock and Sandy Hook Proving Ground Historic District, and Sandy Hook Light and one NHL is the onshore Project components' portion of the viewshed APE, Green-Wood Cemetery; and WHEREAS, within the range of Project alternatives analyzed in the EIS, BOEM determined that eight historic districts and eight individual historic properties would be subject to visual adverse effects from WTGs, thirty submerged cultural properties (Targets 01-30) may be potentially adversely affected by physical disturbance from export cable construction within the avoidance buffers of these resources, twenty-two ASLFs may be potentially adversely affected by physical disturbance in the lease area and from export cable construction, and no historic properties in the terrestrial APE would be adversely affected with implementation of the undertaking; and WHEREAS, BOEM determined there would be no visual adverse effect to two of the three NHLs in the offshore viewshed APE, Cyclone Roller Coaster and Fort Hancock and Sandy Hook Proving Ground Historic District, because ocean views are not character-defining features of these historic properties, and BOEM determined there would be no visual adverse effect to the one NHL in the onshore viewshed APE, Green-Wood Cemetery, because proposed onshore substation and O&M Base would be partially visible from one of the highest topographic points of the cemetery but would be a minor middleground element in the built environment of the Gowanus Bay shoreline, and BOEM determined there would be an visual adverse effect to one NHL in the offshore viewshed APE, Sandy Hook Light; and WHEREAS, BOEM determined that the implementation of the avoidance measures identified in this MOA will avoid adverse effects to seven historic districts and 17 aboveground historic properties in the offshore viewshed APE, to one historic district and three historic properties in the onshore viewshed APE; and WHEREAS, BOEM determined all of the ASLFs identified in the marine APE are eligible for the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) under Criteria A and D and determined, under each of the Project alternatives analyzed in the EIS, that the undertaking will adversely affect the following 22 ASLFs: Targets 31 through 52; and WHEREAS, BOEM determined the undertaking will adversely affect the all 30 marine archaeological resources identified in the marine APE: Targets 1 through 30; and 2
133	WHEREAS, under each of the Project alternatives analyzed in the EIS, BOEM determined the Project would visually adversely affect these three historic districts and three aboveground historic properties in New Jersey: Allenhurst Residential Historic District, Allenhurst; Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association District, Ocean Grove; Water Witch (Monmouth Hills) Historic District, Middleton; Romer Shoal Light, Lower New York Bay; Sandy Hook Light, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Parks Service unit), Middleton, Fort Hancock, U.S. Life Saving Station in Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service), Highlands; and five historic districts and five aboveground historic properties in New York: Breezy Point Surf Club Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Parks Service unit), Rockaway, Queens, New York; Silver Gull Beach Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Parks Service unit), Rockaway; Jacob Riis Park Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Parks Service unit) Rockaway; Fire Island Lighthouse and Historic District, Fire Island National Seashore (National Parks Service unit), Islip; Point of O'Woods Historic District, Islip; West Bank Light Station, Staten Island; Jones Beach State Park, Parkway and Causeway System, Hempstead/Oyster Bay; Robert Moses State Park, Babylon; Fire Island Lighthouse, Fire Island National Seashore (National Parks Service unit), Islip; Carrington House, Fire Island National Seashore (National Parks Service unit), Brook Haven; and WHEREAS, New Jersey SHPO concurred with BOEM's finding of adverse effect on [insert date of SHPO's concurrence] and New York SHPO concurred with BOEM's finding of adverse effect on [insert date of SHPO's concurrence]; and WHEREAS, throughout this document the term 'Tribe,' has the same meaning as 'Indian Tribe,' as defined at 36 CFR 800.16(m); and WHEREAS, BOEM invited the following federally recognized Tribes to consult on this Project: Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, Eastern Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma, Mohegan Tribe of Connecticut, Shawnee Tribe, the Narragansett Indian Tribe, and the Shinnecock Indian Nation; the Delaware Tribe of Indians, Delaware Nation, the Stockbridge-Munsee Community Band of Mohican Indians; and WHEREAS, the Delaware Tribe of Indians, Delaware Nation, the Shinnecock Indian Nation, and the Wampanoag Tribe of Gay Head (Aquinnah) accepted BOEM's invitation to consult and BOEM invited these Tribes to sign this MOA as concurring parties; and WHEREAS, in accordance with 36 CFR 800.3, BOEM invited other federal agencies, state and local governments, and additional consulting parties with a demonstrated interest in the undertaking to participate in this consultation, the list of those accepting participation and declining to participate by either written response or no response to direct invitations are listed in Attachment 2; and WHEREAS, BOEM has consulted with Empire in its capacity as an applicant seeking federal approval of the COP, and, because Empire has responsibilities under the MOA, BOEM has invited the applicant to be an invited signatory to this MOA; and WHEREAS, construction of the Project requires a Department of the Army permit from the United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) for activities that result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into jurisdictional wetlands and/or other waters of the United States pursuant to Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, and activities occurring in or affecting navigable waters of the United States pursuant to Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act; and WHEREAS, BOEM invited USACE to consult since USACE will be issuing permits for this Project under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1344) and Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act (33 USC 403); and 3
134	WHEREAS, the USACE designated BOEM as the Lead Federal Agency pursuant to 36 CFR 800.2(a)(2) to act on its behalf for purposes of compliance with Section 106 for this Project (in a letter dated [Month XX, 20XX], BOEM invited the USACE to sign this MOA as a concurring party, and the USACE accepted the invitation to sign this MOA as a concurring party; and WHEREAS, USACE is the Lead Federal Agency, reviewed, and authorized a separate South Brooklyn Marine Terminal Port Improvement Project in Brooklyn, New York, which includes marine upgrades at the Empire Wind 1 O&M facility at the South Bay Marine Terminal (SMBT), is considered a Connected Action to the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project, and also reviewed by BOEM as part of this undertaking; and WHEREAS, BOEM notified and invited the Secretary of the Interior (represented by the National Park Service (NPS) to consult regarding this Project pursuant to the Section 106 regulations, including consideration of the potential effects to the NHLs as required under NHPA Section 110(f) (54 USC 306107) and 36 CFR 800.10, the NPS accepted BOEM's invitation to consult, and BOEM invited the NPS to sign this MOA as a concurring party; and WHEREAS, BOEM has consulted with the signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties participating in the development of this MOA regarding the definition of the undertaking, the delineation of the APEs, the identification and evaluation of historic properties, the assessment of potential effects to the historic properties, and on measures to avoid minimize, and mitigate adverse effects to historic properties; and WHEREAS, BOEM has planned and is taking action to minimize harm, as required by NHPA Section 110(f) at 36 CFR 800.10 to the one adversely effected NHL in the viewshed APE, Sandy Hook Light, as explained in BOEM's 2022 Finding of Adverse Effect for the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Construction and Operations Plan (hereafter, the Finding of Effect, and dated [Month 2023]), such measures to include using non-reflective white and light gray paint on offshore structures and using navigational lighting that minimizes the visibility of the Project from this NHL; and WHEREAS, pursuant to 36 CFR 800.6, BOEM invited Empire to sign as invited signatory and the consulting parties as listed in Attachment 2 to sign as concurring parties; however, the refusal of any consulting party to sign this MOA or otherwise concur does not invalidate or affect the effective date of this MOA, and consulting parties who choose not to sign this MOA will continue to receive information if requested and have an opportunity to participate in consultation as specified in this MOA; and WHEREAS, the signatories agree, consistent with 36 CFR 800.6(b)(2), that adverse effects will be resolved in the manner set forth in this MOA; and WHEREAS, BOEM sought and considered the views of the public regarding Section 106 for this Project through the NEPA process by holding virtual public scoping meetings when initiating the NEPA and NHPA Section 106 review on June 30, July 8 and 13, 2021 and virtual public hearings related to the Draft EIS on [Month Days], 2022; and WHEREAS, BOEM made the first Draft MOA available to the public for review and comment from November 18, 2022, to January 17, 2022, and made an updated version of the Draft MOA available to the public from [Month XX, 2022], to [Month XX, 2022], using BOEM's Project website, and BOEM [did or did not receive any comments from the public]; and NOW, THEREFORE, BOEM, the New Jersey SHPO, New York SHPO, and the ACHP agree that the undertaking shall be implemented in accordance with the following stipulations in order to take into account the effect of the undertaking on historic properties. 4
135	STIPULATIONS BOEM, with the assistance of Empire Wind, shall ensure that the following measures are carried out as conditions of its approval of the undertaking: I. MEASURES TO AVOID ADVERSE EFFECTS TO IDENTIFIED HISTORIC PROPERTIES A. Marine APE 1. BOEM will include the following avoidance measures for adverse effects within the marine APE as conditions of approval of the Empire Wind COP: i. Empire will avoid known historic submerged cultural resources, such as shipwrecks and debris fields, previously identified during marine archaeological surveys by a distance of no less than 50 meters from the known extent of the resource for placement of Project structures and when conducting seafloor-disturbing activities. ii. Empire will avoid potential submerged cultural resources, such as potential shipwrecks and potentially significant debris fields previously identified during marine archaeological surveys by a distance of no less than 300 meters from the known extent of the resource, unless the buffer would preclude the installation of facilities at their engineered locations, but in no event would the buffer be less than 100 meters from the known extent of the resource. iii. Empire will avoid ASLFs previously identified during marine archaeological resource assessments for the Project by a distance of no less than 50 meters from the known extent of the resource for placement of Project structures and when conducting seafloor- disturbing activities, to the extent practicable. B. Viewshed APE 1. BOEM will include the following avoidance measures for adverse effects within the viewshed APE as conditions of approval of the Empire COP: i. To maintain avoidance of adverse effects to historic properties in the viewshed APE where BOEM determined no adverse effects or where no effects would occur, BOEM will require Empire to ensure Project structures are within the design envelope, sizes, scale, locations, lighting prescriptions, and distances that were used by BOEM to inform the definition of the APE for the Project and for determining effects in the Finding of Effect (see the Construction & Operations Plan: Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project, May, 2022). II. MEASURES TO MINIMIZE ADVERSE EFFECTS TO IDENTIFIED HISTORIC PROPERTIES A. Viewshed APE 1. BOEM has undertaken planning and actions to minimize adverse effects to aboveground historic properties in the viewshed APE. BOEM will include these minimization measures for adverse effects within the viewshed APE as conditions of approval of the Empire Wind COP: i. Empire will use uniform WTG design, speed, height, and rotor diameter to reduce visual contrast and decrease visual clutter. 5
136	ii. Empire will use consistent and as far apart as possible, with maximum spacing in the dominant trawl tow direction where feasible, with minimum spacing of no less than 0.65 NM (1.2 km) to decrease visual clutter, aligning WTGs to allow for safe transit corridors. iii. Empire will apply a paint color to the WTGs no lighter than RAL 9010 pure white and no darker than RAL 7035 light gray to help reduce the potential visibility of the turbines against the horizon during daylight hours. iv. Empire will implement an aircraft detection lighting system (ADLS) to automatically activate lights when aircraft approach the wind farm. The WTGs and OSS would be lit and marked in accordance with FAA and USCG lighting standards and consistent with BOEM's Guidelines for Lighting and Marking of Structures Supporting Renewable Energy Development (April 28, 2021) to reduce light intrusion. III. MEASURES TO MITIGATE ADVERSE EFFECTS TO IDENTIFIED HISTORIC PROPERTIES A. Marine APE 1. Empire will encroach on the avoidance buffers for thirty (30) marine archaeological resources (Targets 1-30). To resolve the adverse effects to these resources, BOEM will include the conditions of approval of the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm COP and require Empire to fulfill the following as mitigation measures before construction. BOEM will require Empire to develop a treatment plan with more mitigation measures details and consultation specificity if New Jersey SHPO, New York SHPO, ACHP, and the consulting parties agree to these proposed mitigation measures for the potentially adversely affected historic properties: i. Phase IB identification/Phase II NRHP evaluation and site boundary delineation, including: a. Additional high-resolution geophysical (HRG) survey to further refine target boundaries (i.e. increased data density for the reassessment of target and dive planning). b. Identification, significance evaluation, and delineation of the target sources accomplished with a remotely operated vehicle or, subject to satisfaction of internal health safety and environment (HSE) requirements and protocols, surface-supplied diver investigations, depending upon HRG survey characteristics. This could include limited investigation. c. As part of this mitigation measure, the applicant and contractors will continue archival research in state and/or federal repositories. ii. Revisit avoidance recommendation and adjust avoidance buffer, if warranted, based on Phase IB/Phase II results and allow BOEM to make a final determination if the avoidance buffers need to be adjusted iii. Coordinate with BOEM regarding recommended NRHP eligibility, allow BOEM to make the final determination, and consult further with interested Consulting Parties [these consulting parties will be identified through future consultation on this MOA and associated treatment plan], if the properties are determined eligible for listing in the NRHP. 6
137	iv. If NRHP-eligible, BOEM, with the assistance of Empire, will consult with the New Jersey SHPO, ACHP, and interested Consulting Parties [these consulting parties will be identified through future consultation on this MOA and associated treatment plan] to develop a limited data recovery research design and alternative mitigation. v. Subject to the satisfaction of internal HSE requirements and protocols, Phase III data recovery will be accomplished through surface-supplied diver excavation. Level of effort dependent on consultation but could include: a. Limited excavation and data recovery of selected sections of the archaeological site. b. Recovery and conservation of select diagnostic artifacts for potential use in an exhibit or other public outreach program. This would be based on the opportunity determined during excavation and mapping. c. Alternative mitigation to offset full data recovery (offsite). Examples include a robust archival research project or HRG survey designed to locate vessel loss.