cent The architectural investigation includes areas where there is potential for historic properties to be affected by physical or visual impacts from the connected action, and the area studied is sufficient for the scale and scope of the SBMT port infrastructure improvement activities. BOEM finds the inventory of historic properties is sufficient to consult on the undertaking and represents a good-faith effort to identify historic properties within the connected action portion of the visual APE for this undertaking, as defined at 36 CFR 800.4. In addition to the conclusions summarized above, BOEM has found that the assessment of effects on historic properties within the APE for this undertaking, including the Proposed Action and the connected action, contained within these reports is sufficient to apply the criteria of adverse effects and to continue consultations with consulting parties for resolving adverse effects on historic properties. Consequent to the reports prepared for the COP submittal, ICF prepared for BOEM a technical report to support BOEM's cumulative effects analysis, the Cumulative Historic Resources Visual Effects Analysis for Empire Wind Farm Project (BOEM 2022). The Cumulative Historic Resources Visual Effects Analysis presents the analysis of cumulative visual effects where BOEM has determined, in review of the Historic Resources Visual Effects Assessment (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022), that historic properties would be adversely affected by the Projects. The effects of other reasonably foreseeable wind energy development activities are additive to those adverse effects from the Projects, resulting in cumulative effects. Fourteen historic properties within the viewshed of WTGs for the Projects and other reasonably foreseeable offshore wind energy development activities would be adversely affected by cumulative visual effects. These 14 historic properties are West Bank Light Station in Staten Island, New York; Breezy Point Surf Club Historic District in Rockaway, Queens, New York (National Park Service); Silver Gull Beach Club Historic District in Rockaway, Queens, New York (National Park Service); Jacob Riis Park Historic District in Rockaway, Queens, New York (National Park Service); Jones Beach State Park, Parkway and Causeway System, Hempstead/Oyster Bay, New York; Robert Moses State Park in Babylon/Islip, New York; Fire Island Lighthouse in Islip, New York; Fire Island Light Station Historic District in Islip, New York; Carrington House in Brook Haven, New York; Point O'Woods Historic District in Islip, New York; Romer Shoal Light Station in Lower New York Bay, New Jersey; Sandy Hook Light in Middleton, New Jersey (National Park Service); Fort Hancock, U.S. Life Saving Station in Highlands, New Jersey (National Park Service); Allenhurst Residential Historic District in Allenhurst, New Jersey; Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association District in Ocean Grove, New Jersey; and Water Witch (Monmouth Hills) Historic District in Middleton, New Jersey. N-12
95	Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP Table N-1 Summary of Cultural Resources Investigations Performed by Empire in the Terrestrial, Marine, and Visual APE Portion of APE Report Description Key Findings / Recommendation Marine Marine Marine archaeological resources This report identified 52 potential historic properties: 30 marine Archaeological assessment of HRG survey data archaeological resources and 22 ancient submerged landforms. All of Resources collected during multiple non- these resources are potentially eligible for listing in the NRHP. Assessment For The intrusive survey campaigns A total of 30 potential marine archaeological resources (all potential Empire Offshore conducted by third-party marine historic properties) were identified within the marine PAPE (Targets Wind: Empire Wind survey contractors and 01-30): seven within the Lease Area, 21 within the EW 1 submarine Project (EW 1 and geotechnical assessment within export cable route, and two within the EW 2 submarine export cable EW 2) For Lease marine PAPE representing the route. SEARCH recommended avoidance of Targets 01-21, 23-26, Area OCS-A 0512 extent of anticipated seabed and 28-30 by a minimum distance of 50 meters (164 feet) from the Construction And impacts associated with the extent of the magnetic anomalies or acoustic contacts. SEARCH Operations Plan Projects. recommended avoidance of Targets 22 and 27 by a minimum distance (COP Volume 3, of 30 meters (98 feet) from the extent of the acoustic contacts. If Appendix X; Empire avoidance is not feasible, SEARCH recommended additional 2022) archaeological investigation, which may include refined HRG survey, additional archival/background research, or diver/remotely operated vehicle verification to determine the source(s) of the target and assess its integrity, significance, and eligibility for listing in the NRHP as a historic property. This report also identified 22 ancient submerged landforms with archaeological or TCP historic property potential within the marine PAPE (Targets 31-52). Based on findings from 31 geotechnical samples, SEARCH recommended avoidance and minimization measures for ancient submerged landforms, which may include micro- siting facilities and work zones away from features and avoidance buffers or adjusting burial depth of cabling across features. N-13
96	Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP Portion of APE Report Description Key Findings / Recommendation Terrestrial Empire Offshore Background research of known This report concluded no archaeological historic properties are known Wind: Empire Wind archaeological resources within within the EW 1 terrestrial PAPE and, overall, the EW 1 onshore Project (EW 1 and the study area composed of EW portions of the Projects possess low sensitivity to contain intact EW 2), Phase I 1 interconnection cable route, archaeological resources that might be eligible for listing in the NRHP. Terrestrial onshore substation, and O&M This assessment of low sensitivity is due to prior large-scale ground- Archaeological facility locations and 0.25-mile disturbing activities. Survey, Empire (0.4-kilometer) buffer Tetra Tech recommended construction and operations of the EW 1 Wind 1 surrounding the aforementioned Project components be permitted within the areas surveyed and, if any Interconnection EW 1 onshore components; substantial modifications are made to the Project design, consultation Cable Corridor, methods and findings of with New York SHPO and possibly additional archaeological survey Onshore Substation, terrestrial archaeological survey may be necessary. and O&M Base, (i.e., pedestrian reconnaissance) Brooklyn, Kings of the EW 1 PAPE; and County, New York assessment of archaeological (COP Volume 3, sensitivity within the EW 1 Appendix Y; Empire PAPE. 2022) Terrestrial Empire Offshore Background research of known This report concluded no archaeological historic properties are known Wind: Empire Wind archaeological resources within within the EW 2 terrestrial PAPE and, overall, the onshore portions of Project (EW 1 and the study area composed of EW the Projects possess low sensitivity to contain intact archaeological EW 2), Phase I 2 onshore export and resources that might be eligible for listing in the NRHP. This Terrestrial interconnection cable routes and assessment of low sensitivity is due to prior large-scale natural or Archaeological onshore substation and 0.25- ground-disturbing activities. Survey, Empire mile (0.4-kilometer) buffer Tetra Tech recommended construction and operations of the EW 2 Wind 2 Onshore surrounding the aforementioned Project components be permitted within the areas surveyed. Export and EW 2 onshore components; Furthermore, Tetra Tech recommended, as deemed necessary by Interconnection methods and findings of New York SHPO, an archaeological monitor be present at three Cable Corridor and terrestrial archaeological survey locations with moderate archaeological sensitivity to identify any Onshore Substation, (i.e., pedestrian reconnaissance) archaeological resources that may potentially be revealed during City of Long Beach of the EW 2 PAPE; and construction activities. and Town of assessment of archaeological This report concluded that, with implementation of the above Hempstead, Nassau sensitivity within the EW 2 measures, no significant adverse impacts on archaeological resources County, New York PAPE. would be expected to result from construction or operations of the (COP Volume 3, proposed EW 2 onshore facilities and, if any substantial modifications Appendix Y; Empire are made to the Project design, consultation with New York SHPO and 2022) possibly additional archaeological survey may be necessary. N-14
97	"Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP Portion of APE Report Description Key Findings / Recommendation Visual Empire Wind Visual A study evaluating visual This report identified 14 historic districts and 25 individual properties Effects on Historic impacts on historic properties. within the offshore infrastructure PAPE. A ""No Adverse Effect"" Properties (COP recommendation was made for 23 properties, and a Potential for Volume 3, Appendix Adverse Effect was recommended for 16 properties: West Bank Light Z; Empire 2022) Station in Staten Island, New York; Breezy Point Surf Club Historic District in Rockaway, Queens, New York (National Park Service); Silver Gull Beach Club Historic District in Rockaway, Queens, New York (National Park Service); Jacob Riis Park Historic District in Rockaway, Queens, New York (National Park Service); Jones Beach State Park, Parkway and Causeway System, Hempstead/Oyster Bay, New York; Robert Moses State Park in Babylon/Islip, New York; Fire Island Lighthouse in Islip, New York and Fire Island Lighthouse Historic District in Islip, New York; Carrington House in Brook Haven, New York; Point O'Woods Historic District in Islip, New York; Romer Shoal Light Station in Lower New York Bay, New Jersey; Sandy Hook Light in Middleton, New Jersey (National Park Service); Fort Hancock, U.S. Life Saving Station in Gateway National Recreation Area, Highlands, New Jersey (National Park Service); Allenhurst Residential Historic District in Allenhurst, New Jersey; Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association District in Ocean Grove, New Jersey; and Water Witch (Monmouth Hills) Historic District in Middleton, New Jersey. The visual effects analysis included three NHL properties in the offshore infrastructure PAPE and one NHL property in the onshore infrastructure PAPE. A Potential for Adverse Effect was recommended for one designated NHL property, Sandy Hook Light (National Park Service). This report also analyzed visual effects on one historic district and three historic properties identified within the onshore infrastructure PAPE. A recommendation of No Adverse Effect was made for all four properties. Mitigation options to resolve adverse effects from visual impacts were recommended for BOEM's consideration. N-15"
98	Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP Portion of APE Report Description Key Findings / Recommendation Terrestrial/ Empire Offshore A study evaluating visual Empire has proposed a third location option for the onshore substation Visual Wind: Empire Wind impacts on historic properties for EW 2, Onshore Substation C, in addition to the previous two Project (EW 1 and resulting from addition of an EW options EW 2 Onshore Substation A and EW 2 Onshore Substation B, EW 2) EW 2 2 Substation C optional location both in Oceanside, New York. Onshore Substation C would be on an Onshore Substation and analysis of potential for approximately 5.2-acre (2.1-hectare) property adjacent to Railroad C Characterization archaeological resources within Place, Island Park, Nassau County, New York. The onshore substation Report (Tetra Tech the amended terrestrial PAPE would connect into the Oceanside POI owned by National Grid and 2021a) associated with the EW 2 operated by Public Service Enterprise Group Long Island. The Substation C optional location. proposed location of EW 2 Onshore Substation C would not require alterations to the location of the existing POI or the proposed onshore export cable route of EW 2 previously outlined in the COP. While the Onshore Substation C study area overlaps approximately 75% of the combined Onshore Substation A/B sites, the addition of Onshore Substation C to the Projects has necessitated changes to the refined onshore PAPE that include additional areas in Atlantic Beach, East Atlantic Beach, and Lawrence, New York. The location of the proposed EW 2 Onshore Substation C was assessed for archaeological resources during the surveys completed in 2019 and 2021 as part of the EW 2 study area described in the COP, because it is along the EW 2 onshore export cable corridor. As such, no further assessment is required to cover the EW 2 Onshore Substation C site. This report also analyzed visual effects on historic properties within the onshore infrastructure PAPE. One property, the Cobble Villa, was analyzed, and a recommendation of No Adverse Effect was made for this property. Sources: COP Volume 3, Appendices X, Y, and Z from Empire 2022; Tetra Tech 2021a. PAPE = preliminary area of potential effects N-16
99	Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP Table N-2 Summary of Cultural Resources Investigations Performed by NYCEDC in the Archaeological and Visual APE for the Connected Action Portion of APE Report Description Key Findings / Recommendation Archaeological/ South Brooklyn Marine A cultural resource study From investigations of the archaeological APE, land within Visual Terminal Port Infrastructure completed in support of the the proposed project area was determined to have been Improvement Project, U.S. SBMT port infrastructure previously disturbed or altered (i.e., excavated, landscaped, Army Corps of Engineers/ improvement project permit filled, or utilities installed). No previously identified New York State Department application packet. Complete archaeological resources, areas of archaeological sensitivity, of Environmental NYSDEC structural submerged resources, or New York State Museum Areas Conservation (NYSDEC) archaeological assessment were located within a 0.5-mile buffer surrounding the SBMT Joint Permit Application, form and supporting Section project area. Previously conducted archaeological surveys Appendix C, Cultural 106 assessment information. encompassing the project area and within the 0.5-mile buffer Resources (NYCEDC 2021) surrounding the project area identified no archaeological resources that are historic properties eligible for listing in the NRHP. From investigations of the visual APE, the SBMT was identified as not eligible for listing in the State Register or NRHP as previously determined by the New York SHPO. Five architectural resources that are historic properties either eligible or listed in the NRHP were identified within the visual APE. The SBMT project was recommended to have no effect on three of these historic properties and No Adverse Effect on two of these historic properties. Source: NYCEDC 2021. N-17
100	Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP N.2.2 Consultation and Coordination with the Parties and Public N.2.2.1. Early Coordination Since 2009, BOEM has coordinated OCS renewable energy activities offshore New Jersey and New York with its federal, state, local, and tribal government partners through its Intergovernmental Renewable Energy Task Force. BOEM has met regularly with federally recognized tribes that may be affected by renewable energy activities in the area since 2011, specifically during planning for the issuance of leases and review of site assessment activities. BOEM also hosts public information meetings to help keep interested stakeholders updated on major renewable energy milestones. Information pertaining to BOEM's Intergovernmental Renewable Energy Task Force meetings is available at https://www.boem.gov/renewable-energy/state-activities/renewable-energy-task-force-meetings-1, information pertaining to BOEM's stakeholder engagement efforts in New York is at https://www.boem.gov/renewable-energy/state-activities/new-york-activities, and information pertaining to BOEM's stakeholder engagement efforts in New Jersey is at https://www.boem.gov/renewable-energy/ state-activities/new-jersey-public-information-meetings. N.2.2.2. NEPA Scoping and Public Hearings On June 24, 2021, BOEM announced its NOI to prepare an EIS for the COP. This purpose of the NOI was to solicit input on issues and potential alternatives for consideration in the EIS. Throughout the scoping process, federal agencies; state, tribal, and local governments; and the general public had the opportunity to help BOEM determine significant resources and issues, IPFs, reasonable alternatives, and potential mitigation measures to be analyzed in the EIS, as well as provide additional information. BOEM also used the NEPA commenting process to allow for public involvement in the NHPA Section 106 consultation process (54 USC 300101 et seq. ), as permitted by 36 CFR 800.2(d)(3). Through this notice, BOEM announced its intention to inform its NHPA Section 106 consultation using the NEPA commenting process and invited public comment and input regarding the identification of historic properties or potential effects on historic properties from activities associated with approval of the COP. Additionally, BOEM held virtual public scoping meetings, which included specific opportunities for engaging on issues relative to NHPA Section 106 for the COP, on June 30, 2021, and July 8 and 13, 2021. Virtual public scoping meeting materials and records are available at https://www.boem.gov/Empire- Wind-Scoping-Virtual-Meetings. Through this NEPA scoping process, BOEM received comments related to cultural, historic, archaeological, or tribal resources. These are presented in BOEM's EIS Scoping Report (BOEM 2021) and are summarized as follows: cent Several commenters stated that BOEM should comply with Section 106 of the NHPA including adequate consultation with SHPOs and other stakeholders. cent Several commenters stated that BOEM should recognize tribal sovereignty and provide adequate government-to-government consultation with tribal governments. cent Commenters expressed concern regarding the potential of the proposed Projects to cause impacts, including visual impacts, on archaeological resources, historic architectural resources, historic properties, cultural landscapes, and ethnographic resources in general and at specific locations including Fire Island National Seashore, Gateway National Recreation Area, Point O'Woods, Jones Beach State Park Sea Scape, and National Historic Landmarks and Districts. cent Some commenters felt that the COP's Visual Impact Assessment was not adequate to analyze visual impacts on historic properties and thus to propose appropriate avoidance, minimization, or mitigation N-18
101	"Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP measures. cent Commenters noted that the cumulative impacts assessment for cultural resources must include the cumulative effect that all the proposed wind farm projects in the area have on cultural resources and landscapes. cent One commenter asked if impacts on the fishing industry will be considered as part of the cultural resource surveys required under NEPA. cent Commenters expressed concern that the Projects would disturb the viewshed of places where loved ones were laid to rest, particularly the memorial bench on Long Beach. cent Commenters asked that the EIS identify the level of low-frequency noise and infrasound generated by operation of the turbines, how far it will propagate, how it compares to the baseline noise levels, and impacts on historic structures. cent Commenters suggested that alternatives to the proposed Projects be considered including the elimination of the turbines closest to shore to reduce visual impacts on historic properties, recreation, and tourism. On November 18, 2022, BOEM published a Notice of Availability for the Draft EIS. As part of this process, BOEM accepts comments in the following ways: cent In hard copy form, delivered by hand or by mail, enclosed in an envelope labeled ""Empire Wind COP Draft EIS"" and addressed to Program Manager, Office of Renewable Energy, Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, 45600 Woodland Road, Sterling, Virginia 20166. cent Through the regulations.gov web portal by navigating to http://www.regulations.gov and searching for the docket number. Click the ""Comment Now!"" button to the right of the document link. Enter your information and comment, then click ""Submit."" cent By attending one of the EIS public hearings listed in the notice of availability and providing written or verbal comments. The public comment period is scheduled to close on January 2, 2023. The input received via this process will be used to inform preparation of the Final EIS. N.2.2.3. NHPA Section 106 Consultations On April 29, 2021, BOEM contacted ACHP, New Jersey SHPO, and New York SHPO to provide Project information and notify of BOEM's intention to use the NEPA substitution process to fulfill Section 106 obligations under 36 CFR 800.8(c) in lieu of the procedures set forth in 36 CFR 800.3 through 800.6. On April 29, 2021, BOEM contacted Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, the Delaware Nation, Delaware Tribe of Indians, Eastern Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma, the Mashantucket Pequot Tribal, the Mohegan Tribe of Indians of Connecticut, Shawnee Tribe, Stockbridge-Munsee Community Band of Mohican Indians, the Narragansett Indian Tribe, and the Shinnecock Indian Nation with information about the Projects, and an invitation to be a consulting party to the NHPA Section 106 review of the COP. BOEM also used this correspondence to notify of its intention to use the NEPA substitution process for Section 106 purposes, as described in 36 CFR 800.8(c), during its review. On April 29, 2021, BOEM contacted 277 points of contact from governments and organizations by mail and email, sending information about the Projects, an invitation to be a consulting party to the NHPA Section 106 review of the COP, and the NOI to prepare an EIS. BOEM also used this correspondence to notify potential consulting parties of its intention to use the NEPA substitution process for Section 106 N-19"
102	Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP purposes, as described in 36 CFR 800.8(c), during its review. To aid those consulting parties not familiar with the NEPA substitution process, BOEM developed a National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) Substitution for Section 106 Consulting Party Guide (available at https://www.boem.gov/sites/default/ files/documents/renewable-energy/state-activities/NEPA-Substitution-Consulting-Party-Guide.pdf), which it attached to this correspondence. During the period of May 17-19, 2021, outreach was conducted by phone to confirm receipt of correspondence among the governments and organizations that had not responded to the invitation to consult. The list of the governments and organizations contacted is included in Attachment C. Entities that responded to BOEM's invitation or were subsequently made known to BOEM and added as consulting parties are listed in Attachment D. As follow-up to phone outreach, BOEM corresponded with an additional 10 points of contact from governments and organizations by email to provide the aforementioned materials on June 9, 2021. On June 24, 2021, BOEM contacted ACHP, New Jersey SHPO, New York SHPO, Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, the Delaware Nation, Delaware Tribe of Indians, the Mashantucket Pequot Tribal Nation, the Mohegan Tribe of Indians of Connecticut, the Narragansett Indian Tribe, Shawnee Tribe, Shinnecock Indian Nation, and points of contact from consulting party governments and organizations by mail and email to provide the NOI to prepare an EIS. On June 28, 2021, BOEM distributed an email reminder to consulting parties regarding opportunity to participate in virtual public scoping meetings on June 30, July 8, and July 13, 2021.