Coordination with BOEM on consultation with interested Consulting Parties [the Consulting Parties will be identified through future consultation on this MOA and associated treatment plan] to develop public outreach components (e.g., digital/media products, education materials, non-technical report, etc.). Technical report for peer review and dissemination of data at professional conferences or for publication. Empire Wind cannot avoid twenty-two (22) ASLFs (Targets 31 through 52). To resolve the adverse effects to the twenty-two ASLFs, BOEM will include the following as conditions of approval of the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm COP and require fulfillment of the following as mitigation measures prior to construction. Empire Wind will fund mitigation measures in accordance with Attachment 3 (Historic Property Treatment Plan for the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Ancient Submerged Landform Features Federal Waters on the Outer Continental Shelf): Preconstruction Geoarchaeology. Empire will fulfill the following commitments in accordance with Attachment 3: collaborative review of existing geophysical and geotechnical data with Native American Tribes/Tribal Nations; selection of coring locations in consultation with Tribes/Tribal Nations; collection of two to three vibracores within each affected ASLF that has not been previously sampled, with a sampling focus on areas that will be disturbed by Empire's construction activities; written verification to BOEM that the samples collected are sufficient for the planned analyses and consistent with the agreed scope of work; collaborative laboratory analyses at a laboratory located in Rhode Island or New Jersey; screening of recovered sediments for debitage or micro-debitage associated with indigenous land uses; third-party laboratory analyses, including micro- and macro-faunal analyses, micro- and macro-botanical analyses, radiocarbon dating of organic subsamples, and chemical analyses for potential indirect evidence of indigenous occupations; temporary curation of archival core sections; draft reports for review by participating parties; final reporting; complete a NRHP Multiple Property Documentation Form (NPS 10-900-b) form for Targets 31-52; and public or professional presentations summarizing the results of the investigations, developed with the consent of the consulting Tribes/Tribal Nations.

Source GIS and Story Maps. Empire Wind will fulfill the following commitments in accordance with Attachment 3: consultation with the Tribes/Tribal Nations to determine the appropriate open-source GIS platform; review of candidate datasets and attributes for inclusion in the GIS; data integration; development of custom reports or queries to assist in future research or tribal maintenance of the GIS; work sessions with Tribes/Tribal Nations to develop Story Map content; training session with Tribes/Tribal Nations to review GIS functionality; review of Draft Story Maps with Tribes/Tribal Nations; delivery of GIS to Tribes/Tribal Nations; and delivery of Final Story Maps. This mitigation measure will assess seafloor impacts of up to twenty-two ASLFs for the presence of archaeological materials, including but not limited to chipped stone tools, flakes, modified wooden implements, and bone. The post-construction seafloor assessment shall consist of a Qualified Marine Archaeologist (QMA) to conduct a diver visual inspection of the seafloor in the areas where previously identified ASLFs exist and where construction activities will permanently disturb and displace the ASLFs. The Qualified Marine Archaeologist, using either surface supply, Closed Circuit Rebreather, or SCUBA, will document the impacts immediately following the installation of any inter-array cables, Wind Turbine Generators (WTGs), service platforms, and Export Cables that impact the previously identified ASLFs. This inspection will cover not only the immediate physical impacts to the seafloor but also any berms created during trenching activities, anchoring activities, and scour or berms made during pile driving and installation of WTGs. Documentation of the impacted ASLFs shall include the use of standard archaeological methodologies. These methodologies may include but are not limited to establishing a permanent datum, mapping, photo, video, 3D photogrammetry, and collecting a limited number of artifacts. If archaeological materials are identified and recovered, a conservation and curation plan must be in place before recovering any artifacts. For position accuracy, all divers should be tracked using an Ultra-Short Base Line (USBL) positioning system In the final report for each of these investigations. The Qualified Marine Archaeologist must note the seafloor conditions (visibility), environmental conditions (e.g., sandy, mud, shell hash bottom), sea state, and how much time has passed since the construction activities have concluded in the area of the ASLF. A series of as-laid or as-placed plats should show the location of the infrastructure in relation to the ASLF and should include both horizontal and vertical penetration into the ASLF. The maps should also include the location of any sites and artifacts identified as a result of the diver visual inspection. If sites are identified on state-owned submerged bottomlands, a copy of the notification to the state, a copy of the site file, and the site trinomial should be provided as part of the final report. Finally, as part of the final report, the Qualified Marine Archaeologist shall include all dive logs, dive times, and other data associated with the diver visual inspection of the seafloor.

BOEM will require archaeological monitoring during construction in three locations on Barnum Island for Empire Wind 2 that have been previously determined to have a moderate potential for undiscovered archaeological resources as a condition of approval for the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm COP. Archaeological monitoring would reduce potential impacts on undiscovered archaeological resources to a minor level by preventing further physical impacts on the archaeological resources encountered during construction. If archaeological resources or human remains are identified during the Empire Wind's construction, operations, or decommissioning, the onsite construction supervisor would stop work immediately and follow the protocols outlined in the Empire Wind Terrestrial Post-Review Discovery Plan (Attachment 7).

BOEM will include the following as conditions of approval of the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm COP and as mitigation measures to resolve the adverse effects to the eight historic districts and six historic properties that will be visually adversely affected (West Bank Light Station, Staten Island, New York; Breezy Point Surf Club Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit), Rockaway, Queens, New York; Silver Gull Beach Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit), Rockaway, New York; Jacob Riis Park Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit), Rockaway, New York; Jones Beach State Park, Parkway and Causeway System, Hempstead/Oyster Bay, New York; Robert Moses State Park, Babylon, New York; Fire Island Lighthouse, Fire Island National Seashore (National Park Service unit), Islip, New York; Fire Island Light Station Historic District, Fire Island National Seashore (National Park Service unit), Islip, New York; Carrington House, Fire Island National Seashore (National Park Service unit), Brook Haven, New York; Point O'Woods Historic District, Islip, New York; Romer Shoal Light, Lower New York Bay, New Jersey; Sandy Hook Light Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit), Middleton, New Jersey; Fort Hancock, U.S. Life Saving Station in Gateway National Recreation Area (Nation Park Service unit), Highlands, New Jersey, Allenhurst Residential Historic District, Allenhurst, New Jersey; Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association District, Ocean Grove, New Jersey; Water Witch (Monmouth Hills) Historic District, Middleton, New Jersey). 

Empire Wind will fund fulfillment mitigation measures in accordance with Attachment 4 (Historic Properties Treatment Plan for Above-Ground Properties Subject to Adverse Visual Effect) and the following: West Bank Light Station, Staten Island, New York. Mitigation of adverse effects to the West Bank Light Station includes funding from Empire Wind for a structural survey of the resource to be conducted by a Secretary of the Interior-qualified historic architect, to identify preservation-related issues. This will include: collecting and reviewing materials and drawings relating to the construction and history of the property; drafting a historical report of the Staten Island property; photographing the Staten Island property using digital photography; compiling draft documentation for review and comment by interested Consulting Parties [these Consulting Parties will be identified through future consultation on this MOA and associated treatment plan]; developing final documentation, incorporating comments from the Consulting Parties; and upon acceptance of documentation by New York SHPO, distributing documentation packages to the New York SHPO and agreed-upon state and local repositories, as appropriate. From a list of priorities generated by a structural survey, Empire Wind will have the ability to choose the project most appropriate to the resource.

Breezy Point Surf Club Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit), Rockaway, New York. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Breezy Point Surf Club Historic District, Rockaway includes funding by Empire Wind for preparation of a formal nomination of the Breezy Point Surf Club Historic District to the NRHP and for preparation of a HABS/HAER documentation of the proposed Breezy Point Surf Club Historic District.

Silver Gull Beach Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit), Rockaway, New York. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Silver Gull Beach Historic District, Rockaway includes funding by Empire Wind for preparation of a formal nomination of the Silver Gull Beach Historic District to the NRHP and for preparation of a HABS/HAER documentation of the proposed Silver Gull Beach Historic District.

Jacob Riis Park Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit), Rockaway, New York. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Jacob Riis Park Historic District includes funding by Empire Wind for Historic American Engineering Record/Historic American Landscape Survey (HAER/HALS) documentation of selected buildings and/or structures at Jacob Riis Park that have not been the subject of such documentation. This will include: collecting and reviewing materials and drawings relating to the construction and history of the Jacob Riis Park property; drafting a historical report of Jacob Riis Park; photographing the Jacob Riis Park property using digital photography; compiling draft documentation for review and comment by interested Consulting Parties [these Consulting Parties will be identified through future consultation on this MOA and associated treatment plan]; developing final documentation, incorporating comments from the Consulting Parties; and upon acceptance of documentation by New York SHPO, distributing documentation packages to the New York SHPO and agreed-upon state and local repositories, as appropriate. Additionally, Empire Wind will fund the creation of a website or documentation to add to existing park websites that provide information on the historic nature of the selected buildings and/or structures in the Jacob Riis Park historic district to inform the general public and visitors of their historic importance and to sponsor the creation and installation of waysides (interpretive signage) at Jacob Riis Park.

Jones Beach State Park, Parkway and Causeway System, Hempstead/Oyster Bay, New York. Mitigation of adverse effects to Jones Beach State Park includes funding by Empire Wind for Historic American Buildings Survey (HABS)/HAER/HALS documentation of selected buildings and/or structures in Jones Beach State Park that have not been the subject of such documentation. This will include: collecting and reviewing materials and drawings relating to the construction and history of the Jones Beach State Park property; drafting a historical report of Jones Beach State Park; photographing the Jones Beach State Park property using digital photography; compiling draft documentation for review and comment by interested Consulting Parties [these Consulting Parties will be identified through future consultation on this MOA and associated treatment plan]; developing final documentation, incorporating comments from the Consulting Parties; and upon acceptance of documentation by New York SHPO, distributing documentation packages to the New York SHPO and agreed-upon state and local repositories, as appropriate. Additionally, Empire Wind will fund the creation of a website or documentation to add to existing park websites that provide information on the historic nature of the selected buildings and/or structures in Jones Beach State Park to inform the general public and visitors of their historic importance and to sponsor the creation and installation of waysides (interpretive signage) at Jones Beach State Park.

Robert Moses State Park, Babylon, New York. Mitigation of adverse effects to Robert Moses State Park includes funding by Empire Wind for preparation of Historic American Buildings Survey (HABS)/HAER/HALS documentation of selected buildings and/or structures in the Robert Moses State Park that have not been the subject of such documentation. This will include: collecting and reviewing materials and drawings relating to the construction and history of the Robert Moses State Park property; drafting a historical report of Robert Moses State Park; photographing the Robert Moses State Park property using digital photography; compiling draft documentation for review and comment by interested Consulting Parties [these Consulting Parties will be identified through future consultation on this MOA and associated treatment plan]; developing final documentation, incorporating comments from the Consulting Parties; and upon acceptance of documentation by New York SHPO, distributing documentation packages to the New York SHPO and agreed-upon state and local repositories, as appropriate. Additionally, Empire Wind will fund the creation of a website or documentation to add to existing park websites that provide information on the historic nature of the selected buildings and/or structures in the Robert Moses State Park to inform the general public and visitors of their historic importance and to sponsor the creation and installation of waysides (interpretive signage) at Robert Moses State Park.

Fire Island Lighthouse, Fire Island National Seashore (National Park Service unit), Islip, New York. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Fire Island Lighthouse includes funding by Empire Wind for a structural survey of the Fire Island Lighthouse resource to be conducted by a Secretary of the Interior-qualified historic architect, to identify preservation-related issues. This will include: collecting and reviewing materials and drawings relating to the construction and history of the Fire Island Lighthouse property; drafting a historical report of Fire Island Lighthouse; photographing the Fire Island Lighthouse property using digital photography; compiling draft documentation for review and comment by interested Consulting Parties [these Consulting Parties will be identified through future consultation on this MOA and associated treatment plan]; develop final documentation, incorporating comments from the Consulting Parties; and upon acceptance of documentation by New Jersey SHPO, distribute documentation packages to the New Jersey SHPO and agreed-upon state and local repositories, as appropriate. From a list of priorities generated by a structural survey, Empire Wind will have the ability to choose the project most appropriate to the resource.

Fire Island Station Historic District, Fire Island National Seashore (National Park Service unit), Islip, New York. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Fire Island Light Station Historic District, Islip, New York includes funding by Empire Wind for the creation of interpretive materials for the Fire Island Light Station Historic District. In consultation with National Park Service, these interpretive materials may contrast historic and contemporary conditions or otherwise preserve the record of the historic conditions of the Fire Island Station Historic District.

Carrington House, Brook Haven, Fire Island National Seashore (National Park Service unit), New York. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Carrington House includes funding by Empire Wind for HABS Level II documentation, substituting digital photography for the HABS-standard large-format photography, to record the historic properties' significance for state and local repositories. This will include: collecting and reviewing materials and drawings relating to the construction and history of the Carrington House property; drafting a historical report of Carrington House; photographing the Carrington House property using digital photography; compiling draft documentation for review and comment by interested Consulting Parties [these Consulting Parties will be identified through future consultation on this MOA and associated treatment plan]; developing final documentation, incorporating comments from the Consulting Parties; and upon acceptance of documentation by New Jersey SHPO, distributing documentation packages to the New Jersey SHPO and agreed-upon state and local repositories, as appropriate.

Point O'Woods Historic District, Islip, New York. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Point O'Woods Historic Districts includes funding by Empire Wind to conduct background research into the historic appearance of the Point O'Woods Historic District during its period of significance, with a particular focus on the historic landscape. Research will include, but not be limited to, an inspection of documents maintained by local libraries, historical societies, state archives, and the administrative or municipal offices of the individual Point O'Woods Historic Districts and the result of the research and submittals will be provided to these repositories for use in disseminating this historical information to the public. Empire Wind will fund development of the creation of walking tours highlighting the history of the area and will provide funding to make walking tour documentation such as scripts or recordings available online to further promote accessibility. The walking tours would be developed in collaboration with local historical societies or educational institutions and focus on the architecture and architects who designed the notable buildings as well as the intersections of tourism, environmentalism, and preservation. In locations where entities already have an existing system of robust tours, Empire Wind will subsidize paid admission to these tours, making historical information more accessible to a broader public. Additionally, Empire Wind will fund the restoration of historic landscape features, such as paths, hedges, plantings, and benches, to mitigate adverse effects on the Point O'Woods Historic District.

Romer Shoal Light, Lower New York Bay, New Jersey. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Romer Shoal Light includes funding by Empire Wind for a structural survey of the Romer Shoal Light resource to be conducted by a Secretary of the Interior-qualified historic architect, to identify preservation-related issues. This will include: collecting and reviewing materials and drawings relating to the construction and history of the Romer Shoal Light property; drafting a historical report of Romer Shoal Light; photographing the Romer Shoal Light property using digital photography; compiling draft documentation for review and comment by interested Consulting Parties [these Consulting Parties will be identified through future consultation on this MOA and associated treatment plan]; developing final documentation, incorporating comments from the Consulting Parties; and upon acceptance of documentation by New Jersey SHPO, distributing documentation packages to the New Jersey SHPO and agreed-upon state and local repositories, as appropriate. From a list of priorities generated by a structural survey, Empire Wind will have the ability to choose the project most appropriate to the Romer Shoal Light resource.

Sandy Hook Light, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit), Middleton, New Jersey. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Sandy Hook Light includes funding by Empire Wind for a structural survey of the Sandy Hook Light resource to be conducted by a Secretary of the Interior-qualified historic architect, to identify preservation-related issues. This will include: collecting and reviewing materials and drawings relating to the construction and history of the Sandy Hook Light property; drafting a historical report of Sandy Hook Light; photographing the Sandy Hook Light property using digital photography; compiling draft documentation for review and comment by interested Consulting Parties [these Consulting Parties will be identified through future consultation on this MOA and associated treatment plan]; developing final documentation, incorporating comments from the Consulting Parties; and upon acceptance of documentation by New Jersey SHPO, distributing documentation packages to the New Jersey SHPO and agreed-upon state and local repositories, as appropriate. From a list of priorities generated by a structural survey, Empire Wind will have the ability to choose the project most appropriate to the Sandy Hook Light resource.

Fort Hancock, U.S. Life Saving Station, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit), Highlands, New Jersey. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Fort Hancock, U.S. Life Saving Station includes funding by Empire Wind for a structural survey of the Fort Hancock resource to be conducted by a Secretary of the Interior-qualified historic architect, to identify preservation-related issues. This will include: collecting and reviewing materials and drawings relating to the construction and history of the Fort Hancock property; drafting a historical report of Fort Hancock; photographing the Fort Hancock property using digital photography; compiling draft documentation for review and comment by interested Consulting Parties [these Consulting Parties will be identified through future consultation on this MOA and associated treatment plan]; developing final documentation, incorporating comments from the Consulting Parties; and upon acceptance of documentation by New Jersey SHPO, distributing documentation packages to the New Jersey SHPO and agreed-upon state and local repositories, as appropriate. From a list of priorities generated by a structural survey, Empire Wind will have the ability to choose the project most appropriate to the Fort Hancock resource.

Allenhurst Residential Historic District, Allenhurst, New Jersey. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Allenhurst Residential Historic Districts includes funding by Empire Wind to conduct background research into the historic appearance of the Allenhurst Residential Historic District during its period of significance, with a particular focus on the historic landscape. The research will include, but not be limited to, an inspection of documents maintained by local libraries, historical societies, state archives, and the administrative or municipal offices of the individual Allenhurst Residential Historic Districts and the result of the research and submittals will be provided to these repositories for use in disseminating this historical information to the public. Empire Wind will fund the development of walking tours highlighting the history of the area and will provide funding to make walking tour documentation such as scripts or recordings available online to further promote accessibility. The walking tours would be developed in collaboration with local historical societies or educational institutions and focus on the architecture and architects who designed the notable buildings as well as the intersections of tourism, environmentalism, and preservation. In locations where entities already have a system of robust tours, Empire Wind will subsidize paid admission to these tours, making historical information more accessible to a broader public. Additionally, Empire Wind will fund the restoration of historic landscape features, such as paths, hedges, plantings, and benches, to mitigate adverse effects on the Allenhurst Residential Historic District.

Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association District, Ocean Grove, New Jersey. Mitigation of adverse effects on the Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association District includes funding by Empire Wind to conduct background research into the historic appearance of the Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association District during its period of significance, with a particular focus on the historic landscape. The research will include, but not be limited to, an inspection of documents maintained by local libraries, historical societies, state archives, and the administrative or municipal offices of the individual Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association Districts and the result of the research and submittals will be provided to these repositories for use in disseminating this historical information to the public. Empire Wind will also fund the development of the creation of walking tours highlighting the history of the Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association District area and will provide funding to make walking tour documentation such as scripts or recordings available online to further promote accessibility. The walking tours would be developed in collaboration with local historical societies or educational institutions to focus on the architecture and architects who designed the notable buildings as well as the intersections of tourism, environmentalism, and preservation. In locations where entities already have a system of robust tours, Empire Wind will subsidize paid admission to these tours, making historical information more accessible to a wider public. Finally, Empire Wind will sponsor the design and construction of a recreational fitness path within the Ocean Grove Historic District, which would provide a nexus between preserving clean air, outdoor exercise, improved pedestrian safety, and Ocean Grove's historic mandate that spiritual harmony derives, in part, from direct experience of nature. Additionally, Empire Wind will fund the restoration of historic landscape features, such as paths, hedges, plantings, and benches, to mitigate adverse effects on the Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association District.

Water Witch (Monmouth Hills) Historic District, Middleton, New Jersey. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Water Witch (Monmouth Hills) Historic Districts includes funding by Empire Wind to conduct background research into the historic appearance of the Water Witch (Monmouth Hills) Historic District during its period of significance, with a particular focus on the historic landscape. Research will include, but not be limited to, inspection of documents maintained by local libraries, historical societies, state archives, and the administrative or municipal offices of the individual Water Witch (Monmouth Hills) Historic Districts and the result of the research and submittals will be provided to these repositories for use in disseminating this historical information to the public. Empire Wind will also fund development of the creation of walking tours highlighting the history of the area and will provide funding to make walking tour documentation such as scripts or recordings available online to further promote accessibility. The walking tours would be developed in collaboration with local historical societies or educational institutions to and focus on the architecture and architects who designed the notable buildings as well as the intersections of tourism, environmentalism, and preservation. In locations where entities already have an existing system of robust tours, Empire Wind will subsidize paid admission to these walking tours, making historical information more accessible to a wider public. Additionally, Empire Wind will fund restoration of historic landscape features, such as paths, hedges, plantings, and benches, to mitigate adverse effects on the Water Witch (Monmouth Hills) Historic District.

The final identification and evaluation of historic properties within the Area of Potential Effects may occur after publication of the Draft Environmental Impact Statement, but before the initiation of construction on the Outer Continental Shelf lease.