1    OCS EIS/EA BOEM 2022-069 Empire Offshore Wind Draft Environmental Impact Statement Volume 3 November 2022
3    OCS EIS/EA BOEM 2022-069 Empire Offshore Wind, Empire Wind Projects (Empire Wind Projects 1 and Empire Wind Projects 2) Draft Environmental Impact Statement Volume 3 November 2022 Author: Bureau of Ocean Energy Management Office of Renewable Energy Programs Published by: U.S. Department of the Interior Bureau of Ocean Energy Management Office of Renewable Energy Programs
4    This page intentionally left blank.
5    LIST OF APPENDICES M Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impact Assessment N Finding of Adverse Effect for the Empire Wind Construction and Operations Plan

7    "Empire Offshore Wind Appendix M Draft Environmental Impact Statement Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impact Assessment Appendix M. Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impact Assessment M.1. Introduction This appendix describes the Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impact Assessment (SLVIA) methodology and key findings that Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) used to identify the potential impacts of offshore wind structures (Wind Turbine Generators (WTGs) and Offshore Substations (OSS)) on scenic and visual resources within the geographic analysis area. This Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impact Assessment methodology applies to any offshore wind energy development proposed for the Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) and incorporates by reference the detailed description of the methodology described in the Assessment of Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impacts of Offshore Wind Energy Developments on the Outer Continental Shelf of the United States (BOEM 2021). Section M.2, Method of Analysis, describes the specific methodology used to apply the Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impact Assessment methodology to the Construction and Operations Plan (COP) and Section M.3, Results, summarizes the wind farm distances, Fields of View (FOVs), noticeable elements, visual contrasts, scale of change, and prominence that contributed to the determination of impact levels for each Key Observation Point (KOP) under the Proposed Action and each of the action alternatives that include modifications to Wind Turbine Generators array layouts (Alternatives B, E, and F). Visual simulations of the Proposed Action alone, other planned offshore wind projects without the Proposed Action, and other offshore wind projects in combination with the Proposed Action are included in Attachment M-1, Cumulative Visual Simulations. The demarcation line between seascape and open ocean is the U.S. states jurisdictional boundary, 3 nautical miles (3.45 statute miles) (5.5 kilometers) seaward from the coastline (US Congress Submerged Lands Act, 1953). This line coincides with shoreline visibility toward the ocean surface. The line defining the separation of seascape and landscape is based on the juxtaposition of seacoast and landward landscape elements, including topography, water (bays and estuaries), vegetation, and structures. M.2. Method of Analysis The Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impact Assessment has two separate but linked parts: seascape, open ocean, and landscape impact assessment (Seascape, Landscape Impact Assessment) and View Impact Assessment (VIA). Seascape, Landscape Impact Assessment analyzes and evaluates resource sensitivity, susceptibility, and magnitude of change in the consideration of impacts on both the physical elements and features that make up a landscape, seascape, or open ocean; and the aesthetic, perceptual, and experiential aspects of the landscape, seascape, or open ocean that make the landscape, seascape, or open ocean distinctive. These impacts affect the ""feel,"" ""character,"" or ""sense of place"" of an area of landscape, seascape, or open ocean, rather than the composition of a view from a particular place. In Seascape, Landscape Impact Assessment, the impact receptors (the entities that are potentially affected by the proposed Projects) are the seascape/open ocean/landscape itself and its components, both its physical features and its distinctive character. View Impact Assessment analyzes and evaluates the impacts on people of adding the proposed development to views from selected viewpoints. View Impact Assessment evaluates the change to the composition of the view itself and assesses how the people who are likely to be at that viewpoint may be affected by the change to the view. Enjoyment of a particular view is dependent on the viewer and, in View Impact Assessment, the impact receptors are people. The inclusion of both Seascape, Landscape Impact Assessment and View Impact Assessment in the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impact Assessment methodology is consistent with National Environmental Policy Act's (NEPA) objective of providing Americans with aesthetically and culturally pleasing surroundings and NEPA's requirement to consider all potentially significant impacts of development. The magnitude of effect (change) in a seascape, open ocean, landscape, or view depends on the nature, scale, prominence, and visual contrast of the change and its experiential duration. The Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impact Assessment offshore geographic analysis area consists of the extent of the zone of theoretical visibility and zones of visual influence (COP Volume 3, Appendix AA; Empire 2022), as follows: cent Offshore turbine array area where the Wind Turbine Generators and Offshore Substations would be located plus a 40-mile (64.4-kilometer) radius area. This distance is the maximum extent within which a seascape, landscape, or
M-1
8    Empire Offshore Wind Appendix M Draft Environmental Impact Statement Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impact Assessment visual effect could occur, given visibility of the maximum height of the Wind Turbine Generator rotor (951 feet [276.1 meters]) and Offshore Substation (200 feet [61 meters]). Wind Turbine Generator visibility would be variable through the day depending on many factors. View angle, sun angle, and atmospheric conditions would affect the Wind Turbine Generator visibility. Visual contrast of Wind Turbine Generators would vary throughout the day depending on the visual character of the horizon's backdrop and whether the Wind Turbine Generators are backlit, side-lit, or front-lit. If less visual contrast is apparent in the morning hours, then it is likely that the visual contrast may be more pronounced in the afternoon. The inverse is possible, as well. These effects are also influenced by varying atmospheric conditions, direction of view, distance between the viewer and the Wind Turbine Generators, and elevation of the viewer. At closer distances, approximately 12 miles or closer, the form of the Wind Turbine Generator may be the dominant visual element creating the visual contrast regardless of color. At greater distances, color may become the dominant visual element creating visual contrast under certain visual conditions that gives visual definition to the Wind Turbine Generator's form and line. Mathematical calculation of Earth's curvature (EC) over the ocean's surface defines the physical structure height(s) at which the Projects' Wind Turbine Generators and Offshore Substations are visible from offshore and onshore view receptors. Consideration of the height(s) of receptor(s) eye level(s) above the topography or ocean surface results in precise definition of Wind Turbine Generator and Offshore Substation visibility. As the elevation of the viewer increases, the visible extent of individual Wind Turbine Generators and Offshore Substations increases. The geographic analysis area shorelines have prevailing eastward and southward viewing directions. All cardinal directions are conceivable when viewing from a water vessel while at sea. When viewing from onshore and scanning across the ocean's horizon, the color of the horizon backdrop will often vary, including as the sun arcs across the sky from sunrise to sunset. Depending on sun angle, the backdrop sky color may have various intensities of white to gray and sky blue to pale blue to dark blue-gray. Blue sky, partly cloudy, overcast, fog, and haze conditions will influence the color make-up of the horizon's backdrop. The sunrise and sunset have varying degrees of light blue to dark blue, light and dark purples intermixed with oranges, yellows, and reds. Partly cloudy skies may increase the remarkable color effects during the sunset and sunrise periods of the day. When placing Wind Turbine Generators offshore, the visual interplay and contrasting elements in form, line, color, and texture may vary with the ever-changing character of the backdrop. Front-lit Wind Turbine Generators may have strong color contrast against a darker gray sky, giving definition to the Wind Turbine Generator vertical form and line contrast to the ocean's horizontal character and the line where the sea meets sky, or visually dissipate against a whiter backdrop created by high levels of evaporative atmospheric moisture during clear sunny days. Partly cloudy skies may create varying degrees of sunlight reflecting off the white color wind turbines, placing some Wind Turbine Generators in the shadow and making some Wind Turbine Generators appear darker gray and less conspicuous while highlighting other Wind Turbine Generators with a bright white color contrast. The level of noticeability would be directly proportional to the scale of change and prominence in the view and the degree of visual contrast between the Wind Turbine Generators, Offshore Substations, and the corresponding backdrop. These variations through the course of the day may result in periods of moderate to major visual effect while at other times of day would have minor or negligible effect. The Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impact Assessment methodology and parameters assessed consider local stakeholders' identity, culture, values, and issues and the understanding of baseline maritime conditions. Project activities for all stages of the Project life cycle (construction and installation, operations and maintenance, and decommissioning) are assessed against the environmental baseline to identify the potential interactions between the Projects and the seascape, landscape, and viewers. The onshore geographic analysis area includes landfalls, buried onshore export cables, onshore substations, and transmission connections to the electric grid. The visual impacts of onshore components are discussed and summarized in Section 3.20, Scenic and Visual Resources. Potential impacts are assessed to determine an impact level consistent with the definitions in Table M-1. Table M-1 Definitions of Potential Adverse Impact Levels Historic Properties under Impact Level Visual Resources Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) Negligible No historic properties Seascape, Landscape Impact Assessment: Very little or no effect on seascape/landscape unit affected, as defined at 36 character, features, elements, or key qualities either Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 800.4(d)(1). because unit lacks distinctive character, features, elements, or key qualities; values for these are low; or Project visibility would be minimal. View Impact Assessment: Very little or no effect on viewers' visual experience because view value is low, viewers are relatively insensitive to view changes, or Project visibility would be minimal. Minor No adverse effects on Seascape, Landscape Impact Assessment: The Projects would introduce features that may historic properties could have low to medium levels of visual prominence within occur, as defined at 36 the geographic area of an ocean/seascape/landscape CFR 800.5(b). character unit. The Project features may introduce a visual character that is slightly inconsistent with the character of the unit, which may have minor to medium negative effects on the unit's features, elements, or key qualities, but the unit's features, elements, or key qualities have low susceptibility or value. View Impact Assessment: The visibility of the Projects would introduce a small but noticeable to medium level of change to the view's character, have a low to medium level of visual prominence that attracts but may or may not hold the viewer's attention, and have a small to medium effect on the viewer's experience. The viewer receptor sensitivity/ susceptibility/value is low. If the value, susceptibility, and viewer concern for change are medium or high, the nature of the sensitivity is evaluated to determine if elevating the impact to the next level is justified. For instance, a Key Observation Point with a low magnitude of change but a high level of viewer concern (combination of susceptibility/value) may justify adjusting to a moderate level of impact.
M-3
10    Empire Offshore Wind Appendix M Draft Environmental Impact Statement Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impact Assessment Historic Properties under Impact Level Visual Resources Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act Moderate Adverse effects on historic Seascape, Landscape Impact Assessment: The Projects would introduce features that would properties as defined at 36 have medium to large levels of visual prominence within CFR 800.5(a)(1) could the geographic area of an ocean/seascape/landscape occur but would be avoided character unit. The Projects would introduce a visual or minimized using a less- character that is inconsistent with the character of the impactful scenario unit, which may have a moderate negative effect on the contemplated under the unit's features, elements, or key qualities. In areas Project Design Envelope (PDE). affected by large magnitudes of change, the unit's features, elements, or key qualities have low susceptibility or value. View Impact Assessment: The visibility of the Projects would introduce a moderate to large level of change to the view's character, may have moderate to large levels of visual prominence that attracts and holds but may or may not dominate the viewer's attention, and has a moderate effect on the viewer's visual experience. The viewer receptor sensitivity/susceptibility/value is medium to low. Moderate impacts are typically associated with medium viewer receptor sensitivity (combination of susceptibility/ value) in areas where the view's character has medium levels of change, or low viewer receptor sensitivity (combination of susceptibility/value) in areas where the view's character has large changes to the character. If the value, susceptibility, and viewer concern for change are high, the nature of the sensitivity is evaluated to determine if elevating the impact to the next level is justified. Major Adverse effects on historic Seascape, Landscape Impact Assessment: The Projects would introduce features that would properties as defined at 36 have dominant levels of visual prominence within the CFR 800.5(a)(1) could geographic area of an ocean/seascape/landscape occur; at least some would character unit. The Projects would introduce a visual require mitigation to character that is inconsistent with the character of the resolve. unit, which may have a major negative effect on the unit's features, elements, or key qualities. The concern for change (combination of susceptibility/value) to the character unit is high. View Impact Assessment: The visibility of the Projects would introduce a major level of character change to the view; attract, hold, and dominate the viewer's attention; and have a moderate to major effect on the viewer's visual experience. The viewer receptor sensitivity/ susceptibility/value is medium to high. If the magnitude of change to the view's character is medium but the susceptibility or value at the Key Observation Point is high, the nature of the sensitivity is evaluated to determine if elevating the impact to major is justified. If the sensitivity (combination of susceptibility/value) at the Key Observation Point is low in an area where the magnitude of change is large, the nature of the sensitivity is evaluated to determine if lowering the impact to moderate is justified.
M-4
11    Empire Offshore Wind Appendix M Draft Environmental Impact Statement Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impact Assessment M.3. Results M.3.1 Impacts of Proposed Action on Scenic and Visual Resources Atmospheric conditions offshore and near the shoreline limit views more than the typically drier-air conditions in inland areas. Visual simulations from representative viewpoints included as Appendix D to the Empire Wind Visual Impact Assessment Report (COP Volume 3, Appendix AA; Empire 2022) indicate that daytime and nighttime visibility of Wind Turbine Generators and Offshore Substations would be noticeable to the casual observer from beach and landward viewpoints. Distances to the Proposed Action Wind Turbine Generator and Offshore Substation array from designated Key Observation Points would range from: cent 32.3 miles (52 kilometers) from Key Observation Point-9 (Otis Park Fire Island High Dune Wilderness) on the northeastern extent of the geographic analysis area; cent 14.1 miles (22.7 kilometers) from Key Observation Point-7 (Jones Beach State Park), the closest Key Observation Point to the Wind Turbine Generator array; and cent 32 miles (51.5 kilometers) from Key Observation Point-13 (Point Pleasant Beach) on the southern beach of the geographic analysis area. The noticeable daytime and nighttime elements of the Projects' Wind Turbine Generators and substations and their viewshed distances are listed in Table M-2. Each Wind Turbine Generator would have two L-864 flashing red obstruction lights on the top of the nacelle, one of the flashing red obstruction lights is required to be lit (BOEM 2021). Wind Turbine Generators would have additional intermediate lighting on the tower utilizing low-intensity red flashing (L-810) obstruction lighting (see Section 2.1.1.2, Offshore Activities and Facilities). Line-of-sight calculations for onshore viewers (5-foot [1.5-meter] eye level) are based on intervening Earth's curvature screening (7.98 inches [20.3 centimeters] height per mile). Heights of Wind Turbine Generator and substation components are stated relative to mean lower low water (MLLW) and highest astronomical tide. Table M-3 and Table M-4 indicate the Proposed Action's effects based on horizontal Field of View and vertical Field of View, respectively, defined as the extent of the observable landscape seen at any given moment, usually measured in degrees (BOEM 2021). The horizontal Field of View for each Key Observation Point is listed in Appendix D to COP Volume 3, Appendix AA (Empire 2022). Fields of View are valid and reliable indicators of the magnitude of view occupation by Proposed Action facilities. Typical human perception extends to 124 in the horizontal axis and 55 in the vertical axis. The nearest shoreline viewers would be 14.1 miles (25.9 kilometers) from the Wind Farm Development Area. Earth's curvature, at this distance, reduces the observable height above the horizon of the nearest Wind Turbine Generator by 86.1 feet (26.2 kilometers), from 951 feet (289.9 meters) mean lower low water to 864.9 feet (263.6 meters), resulting in occupation of 0.7, 1.3 percent of the vertical view. Remaining Wind Turbine Generators would further diminish in perceived size with distance and Earth's curvature. Table M-2 Heights of Noticeable1 Wind Turbine Generator Elements and Substations and Visible Distances2 Noticeable Element Height in Feet (meters) Visible Distance2 in Miles (kilometers) Rotor Blade Tip 951 (290) mean lower low water 0-40.5 (65.2) Navigation Light 544 (165.8) mean lower low water 0-31.3 (50.4) Nacelle 534 (162.8) mean lower low water 0-31.1 (50.1) Hub 525 (160) mean lower low water 0-30.8 (49.6) Mid-tower Light 263 (78) mean lower low water 0-22.6 (36.4) Offshore Substation 200 (61) highest astronomical tide 0-20.1 (32.3) Yellow Tower Base Color 50 (15.2) highest astronomical tide 0-11.4 (18.3)
M-5
12    Empire Offshore Wind Appendix M Draft Environmental Impact Statement Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impact Assessment 1 Perception of Project elements, from 5 feet (1.5 meters) human eye-level while standing at mean sea level, involves static distance-related sizes, forms, lines, colors, and textures; variable daytime lighting conditions; variable nighttime light conditions; and variable meteorological conditions. 2 Based on intervening Earth's curvature and clear-day conditions. height above tide = highest astronomical tide Table M-3 Horizontal Field of View Occupied by the Proposed Action Noticeable Width1 Distance2 Horizontal Percent of Human Field of View Element miles (kilometers) miles (kilometers) Field of View Field of View Wind Farm 25.6 (41.2) 14.1 (22.7) 61.1 124 49% 1 Maximum extent of the wind farm array. 2 Nearest onshore distance to the wind farm array. Table M-4 Vertical Field of View Occupied by the Proposed Action Distance Height Above Noticeable Height Vertical Human Percent miles Horizon1 Element feet (miles) Field of View Field of View of Field of View (kilometers) feet (meters) Rotor Blade Tip 951 (276.1) mean lower low water 14.1 (22.7) 864 (263.3) 0.7 55 1.3% 1 Based on intervening Earth's curvature, clear-day, and clear-night conditions. Table M-5 lists the wind farm's distances, horizontal Fields of View, noticeable features based on their heights and Earth's curvature, and visual contrasts. The analysis considers the introduction of Wind Turbine Generators and Offshore Substations to an open ocean baseline. The scale, size, contrast, and prominence of change focuses on the: cent Arrangement of Wind Turbine Generators and Offshore Substations in the view; cent Horizontal Field of View and vertical Field of View scale of the wind farm array, based on Wind Turbine Generator and Offshore Substation size and number; cent Position of the array in the open ocean; cent Position of the array in the view; and cent Array's distance from the viewer. Visibility, character-changing effects, scale, prominence, and visual contrasts reduce steadily with distance from the observation point. Visibility, character-changing effects, scale, prominence, and visual contrasts increase with elevated observer positions in comparison with the wind farm. Distance and observer elevation considerations are informed by the COP View Impact Assessment simulations (COP Volume 3, Appendix D to Appendix AA; Empire 2022), Earth's curvature calculations, horizontal Field of View, and vertical Field of View in undeveloped open ocean. The wind farm's nearest Wind Turbine Generators and Offshore Substations would be: cent Unavoidably dominant features (Wind Turbine Generator yellow tower base and above) in the view between 0 and 12 miles (0 and 19.3 kilometers) distance; cent Strongly pervasive features (Offshore Substation, Wind Turbine Generator mid-tower, mid-tower light, and above) between 12 and 20 miles (19.3 and 32.2 kilometers) distance; cent Clearly visible features (Offshore Substation lights, Wind Turbine Generator tower, and above) between 20 and 28 miles (32.2 and 45.1 kilometers) distance; cent Low on the horizon, but persistent features (Wind Turbine Generator hub, nacelle, navigation light, and rotor) in the view between 28 and 31 miles (45.1 and 49.9 kilometers) distance;
M-6
13    Empire Offshore Wind Appendix M Draft Environmental Impact Statement Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impact Assessment cent Intermittently noticed features (Wind Turbine Generator rotor) between 31 and 39.6 miles (49.9 and 63.7 kilometers) distance; and cent Below the horizon beyond 39.6 miles (63.7 kilometers) distance. The prominence of offshore turbines is rated on a scale of 1 to 6, based on typical viewers' acuity (NAEP 2012). cent Visibility Level 1: Visible only after extended, close viewing; otherwise not visible. cent Visibility Level 2: Visible when scanning in general direction of study subject; otherwise likely to be missed by casual observer. cent Visibility Level 3: Visible after brief glance in general direction of study subject and unlikely to be missed by casual observer. cent Visibility Level 4: Plainly visible, could not be missed by casual observer, but does not strongly attract visual attention, or dominate view because of apparent size, for views in general direction of study subject. cent Visibility Level 5: Strongly attracts visual attention of views in general direction of study subject. Attention may be drawn by strong contrast in form, line, color, texture, luminance, or motion. cent Visibility Level 6: Dominates view because study subject fills most of visual field for views in its general direction. Strong contrasts in form, line, color, texture, luminance, or motion may contribute to view dominance. Visual contrast determinations involve comparisons of characteristics of the seascape, open ocean, and landscape before and after Project implementation. The range of potential contrasts includes strong, moderate, weak, and none (BOEM 2021). The strongest daytime contrasts would result from tranquil and flat seas combined with sunlit Wind Turbine Generator towers, nacelles, rotating rotors, flickering rotors, and a yellow tower base color against a dark background sky and an undifferentiated foreground. There would be daily variation in Wind Turbine Generator color contrast as sun angles change from backlit to front-lit (sunrise to sunset) and the backdrop would vary under different lighting and atmospheric conditions. The weakest daytime contrasts would result from turbulent seas combined with overcast daylight conditions on Wind Turbine Generator towers, nacelles, and rotors against an overcast background sky and a foreground modulated by varied landscape elements. The strongest nighttime contrasts would result from dark skies (absent moonlight) combined with navigation lights, activated lighting on the Offshore Substation, mid-tower lights, and Project lighting reflections on low clouds and active (non-reflective) surf, and the dark-sky light dome. The weakest nighttime contrasts would result from moonlit, cloudless skies; tranquil (reflective) seas; Aircraft Detection Lighting System (ADLS) activation; and only mid-tower lights.
M-7
14    Empire Offshore Wind Appendix M Draft Environmental Impact Statement Seascape, Landscape, and Visual Impact Assessment This page intentionally left blank.