d. Coordination with BOEM on consultation with interested Consulting Parties [these consulting parties will be identified through future consultation on this MOA and associated treatment plan] to develop public outreach components (e.g., digital/media products, education materials, non-technical report, etc.). e. Technical report for peer review and dissemination of data at professional conferences or for publication. 2. Empire cannot avoid twenty-two (22) ASLFs (Targets 31 through 52). To resolve the adverse effects to the twenty-two ASLFs, BOEM will include the following as conditions of approval of the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm COP and require fulfillment of the following as mitigation measures prior to construction. Empire Wind will fund mitigation measures in accordance with Attachment 3 (Historic Property Treatment Plan for the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Ancient Submerged Landform Features Federal Waters on the Outer Continental Shelf): i. Preconstruction Geoarchaeology. Empire will fulfill the following commitments in accordance with Attachment 3: collaborative review of existing geophysical and geotechnical data with Native American Tribes/Tribal Nations; selection of coring locations in consultation with Tribes/Tribal Nations; collection of two to three vibracores within each affected ASLF that has not been previously sampled, with a sampling focus on areas that will be disturbed by Project construction activities; written verification to BOEM that the samples collected are sufficient for the planned analyses and consistent with the agreed scope of work; collaborative laboratory analyses at a laboratory located in Rhode Island or New Jersey; screening of recovered sediments for debitage or micro- debitage associated with indigenous land uses; third-party laboratory analyses, including micro- and macro-faunal analyses, micro- and macro-botanical analyses, radiocarbon dating of organic subsamples, and chemical analyses for potential indirect evidence of indigenous occupations; temporary curation of archival core sections; draft reports for review by participating parties; final reporting; complete a NRHP Multiple Property Documentation Form (NPS 10-900-b) form for Targets 31-52; and public or professional presentations summarizing the results of the investigations, developed with the consent of the consulting Tribes/Tribal Nations. 7
138	ii. Source GIS and Story Maps. Empire will fulfill the following commitments in accordance with Attachment 3: consultation with the Tribes/Tribal Nations to determine the appropriate open-source GIS platform; review of candidate datasets and attributes for inclusion in the GIS; data integration; development of custom reports or queries to assist in future research or tribal maintenance of the GIS; work Sessions with Tribes/Tribal Nations to develop Story Map content; training session with Tribes/Tribal Nations to review GIS functionality; review of Draft Story Maps with Tribes/Tribal Nations; delivery of GIS to Tribes/Tribal Nations; and delivery of Final Story Maps. iii. This mitigation measure will assess seafloor impacts of up to twenty-two ASLFs for the presence of archaeological materials, including but not limited to chipped stone tools, flakes, modified wooden implements, and bone. The post-construction seafloor assessment shall consist of a Qualified Marine Archaeologist (QMA) to conduct a diver visual inspection of the seafloor in the areas where previously identified ASLFS exist and where construction activities will permanently disturb and displace the ASLFs. The QMA, using either surface supply, Closed Circuit Rebreather, or SCUBA, will document the impacts immediately following the installation of any inter-array cables, Wind Turbine Generators (WTGs), service platforms, and Export Cables that impact the previously identified ASLFs. This inspection will cover not only the immediate physical impacts to the seafloor but also any berms created during trenching activities, anchoring activities, and scour or berms made during pile driving and installation of WTGs. Documentation of the impacted ASLFs shall include the use of standard archaeological methodologies. These methodologies may include but are not limited to establishing a permanent datum, mapping, photo, video, 3D photogrammetry, and collecting a limited number of artifacts. If archaeological materials are identified and recovered, a conservation and curation plan must be in place before recovering any artifacts. For position accuracy, all divers should be tracked using an Ultra- Short Base Line (USBL) positioning system In the final report for each of these investigations, the QMA must note the seafloor conditions (visibility), environmental conditions (e.g., sandy, mud, shell hash bottom), sea state, and how much time has passed since the construction activities have concluded in the area of the ASLF. A series of as-laid or as-placed plats should show the location of the infrastructure in relation to the ASLF and should include both horizontal and vertical penetration into the ASLF. The maps should also include the location of any sites and artifacts identified as a result of the diver visual inspection. If sites are identified on state- owned submerged bottomlands, a copy of the notification to the state, a copy of the site file, and the site trinomial should be provided as part of the final report. Finally, as part of the final report, the QMA shall include all dive logs, dive times, and other data associated with the diver visual inspection of the seafloor. B. Terrestrial APE 1. BOEM will require archaeological monitoring during construction in three locations on Barnum Island for EW 2 that have been previously determined to have a moderate potential for undiscovered archaeological resources as a condition of approval for the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm COP. Archaeological monitoring would reduce potential impacts on undiscovered archaeological resources to a minor level by preventing further physical impacts on the archaeological resources encountered during construction. If archaeological resources or human remains are identified during Project construction, operations, or decommissioning, the onsite construction supervisor would stop work immediately and 8
139	follow the protocols outlined in the Empire Wind Terrestrial Post-Review Discovery Plan (Attachment 7). C. Viewshed APE 1. BOEM will include the following as conditions of approval of the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm COP and as mitigation measures to resolve the adverse effects to the eight historic districts and six historic properties that will be visually adversely affected (West Bank Light Station, Staten Island, New York; Breezy Point Surf Club Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit), Rockaway, Queens, New York; Silver Gull Beach Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit), Rockaway, New York; Jacob Riis Park Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit), Rockaway, New York; Jones Beach State Park, Parkway and Causeway System, Hempstead/Oyster Bay, New York; Robert Moses State Park, Babylon, New York; Fire Island Lighthouse, Fire Island National Seashore (National Park Service unit), Islip, New York; Fire Island Light Station Historic District, Fire Island National Seashore (National Park Service unit), Islip, New York; Carrington House, Fire Island National Seashore (National Park Service unit), Brook Haven, New York; Point O'Woods Historic District, Islip, New York; Romer Shoal Light, Lower New York Bay, New Jersey; Sandy Hook Light Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit), Middleton, New Jersey; Fort Hancock, U.S. Life Saving Station in Gateway National Recreation Area (Nation Park Service unit), Highlands, New Jersey, Allenhurst Residential Historic District, Allenhurst, New Jersey; Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association District, Ocean Grove, New Jersey; Water Witch (Monmouth Hills) Historic District, Middleton, New Jersey). Empire will fund fulfillment mitigation measures in accordance with Attachment 4 (Historic Properties Treatment Plan for Above-Ground Properties Subject to Adverse Visual Effect) and the following: i. West Bank Light Station, Staten Island, New York. Mitigation of adverse effects to the West Bank Light Station includes funding from Empire for a structural survey of the resource to be conducted by a Secretary of the Interior-qualified historic architect, to identify preservation-related issues. This will include: collecting and reviewing materials and drawings relating to the construction and history of the property; drafting a historical report of the property; photographing the property using digital photography; compiling draft documentation for review and comment by interested Consulting Parties [these consulting parties will be identified through future consultation on this MOA and associated treatment plan]; developing final documentation, incorporating comments from the Consulting Parties; and upon acceptance of documentation by New York SHPO, distributing documentation packages to the New York SHPO and agreed-upon state and local repositories, as appropriate. From a list of priorities generated by a structural survey, Empire will have the ability to choose the project most appropriate to the resource. ii. Breezy Point Surf Club Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit), Rockaway, New York. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Breezy Point Surf Club Historic District, Rockaway includes funding by Empire for preparation of a formal nomination of the historic district to the NRHP and for preparation of a HABS/HAER documentation of the proposed historic district. iii. Silver Gull Beach Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit), Rockaway, New York. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Silver Gull Beach Historic District, Rockaway includes funding by Empire for preparation of a 9
140	formal nomination of the historic district to the NRHP and for preparation of a HABS/HAER documentation of the proposed historic district. iv. Jacob Riis Park Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit), Rockaway, New York. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Jacob Riis Park Historic District includes funding by Empire for Historic American Engineering Record/Historic American Landscape Survey (HAER/HALS) documentation of selected buildings and/or structures at Jacob Riis Park that have not been the subject of such documentation. This will include: collecting and reviewing materials and drawings relating to the construction and history of the property; drafting a historical report of the property; photographing the property using digital photography; compiling draft documentation for review and comment by interested Consulting Parties [these consulting parties will be identified through future consultation on this MOA and associated treatment plan]; developing final documentation, incorporating comments from the Consulting Parties; and upon acceptance of documentation by New York SHPO, distributing documentation packages to the New York SHPO and agreed-upon state and local repositories, as appropriate. Additionally, Empire will fund the creation of a website or documentation to add to existing park websites that provide information on the historic nature of the selected buildings and/or structures in the historic district to inform the general public and visitors of their historic importance and to sponsor the creation and installation of waysides (interpretive signage) at Jacob Riis Park. v. Jones Beach State Park, Parkway and Causeway System, Hempstead/Oyster Bay, New York. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Jones Beach State Park includes funding by Empire for Historic American Buildings Survey (HABS)/HAER/HALS documentation of selected buildings and/or structures in those parks that have not been the subject of such documentation. This will include: collecting and reviewing materials and drawings relating to the construction and history of the property; drafting a historical report of the property; photographing the property using digital photography; compiling draft documentation for review and comment by interested Consulting Parties [these consulting parties will be identified through future consultation on this MOA and associated treatment plan]; developing final documentation, incorporating comments from the Consulting Parties; and upon acceptance of documentation by New York SHPO, distributing documentation packages to the New York SHPO and agreed-upon state and local repositories, as appropriate. Additionally, Empire will fund the creation of a website or documentation to add to existing park websites that provide information on the historic nature of the selected buildings and/or structures in the park to inform the general public and visitors of their historic importance and to sponsor the creation and installation of waysides (interpretive signage) at Jones Beach State Park. vi. Robert Moses State Park, Babylon, New York. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Robert Moses State Park includes funding by Empire for preparation of Historic American Buildings Survey (HABS)/HAER/HALS documentation of selected buildings and/or structures in the park that have not been the subject of such documentation. This will include: collecting and reviewing materials and drawings relating to the construction and history of the property; drafting a historical report of the property; photographing the property using digital photography; compiling draft documentation for review and comment by interested Consulting Parties [these consulting parties will be identified through future consultation on this MOA and associated treatment plan]; developing final documentation, incorporating comments from the Consulting Parties; and upon acceptance of documentation by New York SHPO, distributing documentation packages 10
141	to the New York SHPO and agreed-upon state and local repositories, as appropriate. Additionally, Empire will fund the creation of a website or documentation to add to existing park websites that provide information on the historic nature of the selected buildings and/or structures in the park to inform the general public and visitors of their historic importance and to sponsor the creation and installation of waysides (interpretive signage) at Robert Moses State Park. vii. Fire Island Lighthouse, Fire Island National Seashore (National Park Service unit), Islip, New York. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Fire Island Lighthouse includes funding by Empire for a structural survey of the resource to be conducted by a Secretary of the Interior-qualified historic architect, to identify preservation-related issues. This will include: collecting and reviewing materials and drawings relating to the construction and history of the property; drafting a historical report of the property; photographing the property using digital photography; compiling draft documentation for review and comment by interested Consulting Parties [these consulting parties will be identified through future consultation on this MOA and associated treatment plan]; develop final documentation, incorporating comments from the Consulting Parties; and upon acceptance of documentation by New Jersey SHPO, distribute documentation packages to the New Jersey SHPO and agreed-upon state and local repositories, as appropriate. From a list of priorities generated by a structural survey, Empire will have the ability to choose the project most appropriate to the resource. viii. Fire Island Station Historic District, Fire Island National Seashore (National Park Service unit), Islip, New York. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Fire Island Light Station Historic District, Islip, New York includes funding by Empire for the creation of interpretive materials for the Fire Island Light Station Historic District. In consultation with NPS, these interpretive materials may contrast historic and contemporary conditions or otherwise preserve the record of the historic conditions of Fire Island Station Historic District. ix. Carrington House, Brook Haven, Fire Island National Seashore (National Park Service unit), New York. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Carrington House includes funding by Empire for HABS Level II documentation, substituting digital photography for the HABS-standard large-format photography, to record the historic properties' significance for state and local repositories. This will include: collecting and reviewing materials and drawings relating to the construction and history of the property; drafting a historical report of the property; photographing the property using digital photography; compiling draft documentation for review and comment by interested Consulting Parties [these consulting parties will be identified through future consultation on this MOA and associated treatment plan]; developing final documentation, incorporating comments from the Consulting Parties; and upon acceptance of documentation by New Jersey SHPO, distributing documentation packages to the New Jersey SHPO and agreed-upon state and local repositories, as appropriate. x. Point O'Woods Historic District, Islip, New York. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Point O'Woods Historic Districts includes funding by Empire to conduct background research into the historic appearance of the historic district during its period of significance, with a particular focus on the historic landscape. Research will include, but not be limited to, an inspection of documents maintained by local libraries, historical societies, state archives, and the administrative or municipal offices of the individual historic districts and the result of the research and submittals will be provided to these repositories for use in disseminating this historical information to the public. Empire will 11
142	fund development of the creation of walking tours highlighting the history of the area and will provide funding to make walking tour documentation such as scripts or recordings, available online to further promote accessibility. The tours would be developed in collaboration with local historical societies or educational institutions to and focus on the architecture and architects who designed the notable buildings as well as the intersections of tourism, environmentalism, and preservation. In locations where entities already have an existing system of robust tours, Empire will subsidize paid admission to these tours, making historical information more accessible to a broader public. Additionally, the Empire Wind will fund the restoration of historic landscape features, such as paths, hedges, plantings, and benches, to mitigate adverse effects on the historic district. xi. Romer Shoal Light, Lower New York Bay, New Jersey. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Romer Shoal Light includes funding by Empire for a structural survey of the resource to be conducted by a Secretary of the Interior-qualified historic architect, to identify preservation-related issues. This will include: collecting and reviewing materials and drawings relating to the construction and history of the property; drafting a historical report of the property; photographing the property using digital photography; compiling draft documentation for review and comment by interested Consulting Parties [these consulting parties will be identified through future consultation on this MOA and associated treatment plan]; developing final documentation, incorporating comments from the Consulting Parties; and upon acceptance of documentation by New Jersey SHPO, distributing documentation packages to the New Jersey SHPO and agreed-upon state and local repositories, as appropriate. From a list of priorities generated by a structural survey, Empire will have the ability to choose the project most appropriate to the resource. xii. Sandy Hook Light, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit), Middleton, New Jersey. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Sandy Hook Light includes funding by Empire for a structural survey of the resource to be conducted by a Secretary of the Interior-qualified historic architect, to identify preservation-related issues. This will include: collecting and reviewing materials and drawings relating to the construction and history of the property; drafting a historical report of the property; photographing the property using digital photography; compiling draft documentation for review and comment by interested Consulting Parties [these consulting parties will be identified through future consultation on this MOA and associated treatment plan]; developing final documentation, incorporating comments from the Consulting Parties; and upon acceptance of documentation by New Jersey SHPO, distributing documentation packages to the New Jersey SHPO and agreed-upon state and local repositories, as appropriate. From a list of priorities generated by a structural survey, Empire will have the ability to choose the project most appropriate to the resource. xiii. Fort Hancock, U.S. Life Saving Station, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit), Highlands, New Jersey. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Fort Hancock, U.S. Life Saving Station includes funding by Empire for a structural survey of the resource to be conducted by a Secretary of the Interior-qualified historic architect, to identify preservation-related issues. This will include: collecting and reviewing materials and drawings relating to the construction and history of the property; drafting a historical report of the property; photographing the property using digital photography; compiling draft documentation for review and comment by interested Consulting Parties [these consulting parties will be identified through future consultation on this MOA and associated treatment plan]; developing final documentation, incorporating comments 12
143	from the Consulting Parties; and upon acceptance of documentation by New Jersey SHPO, distributing documentation packages to the New Jersey SHPO and agreed-upon state and local repositories, as appropriate. From a list of priorities generated by a structural survey, Empire will have the ability to choose the project most appropriate to the resource. xiv. Allenhurst Residential Historic District, Allenhurst, New Jersey. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Allenhurst Residential Historic Districts includes funding by Empire to conduct background research into the historic appearance of the historic district during its period of significance, with a particular focus on the historic landscape. The research will include, but not be limited to, an inspection of documents maintained by local libraries, historical societies, state archives, and the administrative or municipal offices of the individual historic districts and the result of the research and submittals will be provided to these repositories for use in disseminating this historical information to the public. Empire will fund the development of walking tours highlighting the history of the area and will provide funding to make walking tour documentation such as scripts or recordings, available online to further promote accessibility. The tours would be developed in collaboration with local historical societies or educational institutions to and focus on the architecture and architects who designed the notable buildings as well as the intersections of tourism, environmentalism, and preservation. In locations where entities already have a system of robust tours, Empire will subsidize paid admission to these tours, making historical information more accessible to a broader public. Additionally, the Empire will fund the restoration of historic landscape features, such as paths, hedges, plantings, and benches, to mitigate adverse effects on the historic district. xv. Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association District, Ocean Grove, New Jersey. Mitigation of adverse effects on the Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association District includes funding by Empire to conduct background research into the historic appearance of the historic district during its period of significance, with a particular focus on the historic landscape. The research will include, but not be limited to, an inspection of documents maintained by local libraries, historical societies, state archives, and the administrative or municipal offices of the individual historic districts and the result of the research and submittals will be provided to these repositories for use in disseminating this historical information to the public. Empire will also fund the development of the creation of walking tours highlighting the history of the area and will provide funding to make walking tour documentation such as scripts or recordings, available online to further promote accessibility. The tours would be developed in collaboration with local historical societies or educational institutions to focus on the architecture and architects who designed the notable buildings as well as the intersections of tourism, environmentalism, and preservation. In locations where entities already have a system of robust tours, Empire will subsidize paid admission to these tours, making historical information more accessible to a wider public. Finally, Empire will sponsor the design and construction of a recreational fitness path within the Ocean Grove Historic District, which would provide a nexus between preserving clean air, outdoor exercise, improved pedestrian safety, and Ocean Grove's historic mandate that spiritual harmony derives, in part, from direct experience of nature. Additionally, the Empire will fund the restoration of historic landscape features, such as paths, hedges, plantings, and benches, to mitigate adverse effects on the historic district. xvi. Water Witch (Monmouth Hills) Historic District, Middleton, New Jersey. Mitigation of adverse effects to the Water Witch (Monmouth Hills) Historic Districts includes funding 13
144	by Empire to conduct background research into the historic appearance of the historic district during its period of significance, with a particular focus on the historic landscape. Research will include, but not be limited to, inspection of documents maintained by local libraries, historical societies, state archives, and the administrative or municipal offices of the individual historic districts and the result of the research and submittals will be provided to these repositories for use in disseminating this historical information to the public. Empire will also fund development of the creation of walking tours highlighting the history of the area and will provide funding to make walking tour documentation such as scripts or recordings, available online to further promote accessibility. The tours would be developed in collaboration with local historical societies or educational institutions to and focus on the architecture and architects who designed the notable buildings as well as the intersections of tourism, environmentalism, and preservation. In locations where entities already have an existing system of robust tours, Empire will subsidize paid admission to these tours, making historical information more accessible to a wider public. Additionally, the Empire will fund restoration of historic landscape features, such as paths, hedges, plantings, and benches, to mitigate adverse effects on the historic district. IV. PHASED IDENTIFICATION A. The final identification and evaluation of historic properties within the APE may occur after publication of the DEIS, but before the initiation of construction on the OCS lease.