06001304) was listed in the NRHP in 2006 under Criterion A for its association with the late nineteenth century federal program to provide maritime navigational aids in the N-32
115	Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP United States and locally to provide safe access to New York Harbor, and under Criterion C as an intact example of maritime engineering and architecture at the turn of the twentieth century. The light station's period of significance is 1898-1966 (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:43). The property is offshore within Lower New York Bay and has had unimpeded ocean views since it was constructed. Unobstructed sightlines out to the Atlantic Ocean are an important characteristic of the lighthouse's setting and purpose as an aid to maritime navigation. It was assessed that the Projects would diminish this significant characteristic of the property and result in an adverse effect on Romer Shoal Light Station (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:43-44). As described in the Empire Wind Cumulative Historic Resources Visual Effects Analysis, the Romer Shoal Light Station is 25.3 miles from the nearest WTG associated with the Projects and 47.4 miles from the nearest potential WTG location for other wind energy development activities. The total number of potentially visible WTGs from Romer Shoal Light Station is 130. Of these, 130 theoretically visible WTGs (100 percent) would be from the proposed Projects. As such, BOEM determined the Projects would incrementally add to the cumulative visual effects on Romer Shoal Light Station when combined with the effects of other past, present, or reasonably foreseeable future actions (BOEM 2022). N.4.1.3.12 Sandy Hook Light, Gateway National Recreation Area, Middleton, New Jersey (National Park Service) The property is on the Sandy Hook peninsula and is approximately 24.0 miles (38.6 kilometers) from the Wind Farm Development Area. Constructed in 1764, Sandy Hook Light is the oldest extant lighthouse in in the United States. The lighthouse's tower is 103 feet in height and consists of an octagonal brick structure that tapers from a base diameter of 29 feet to 15 feet at the top. The lantern and catwalk are accessed by an interior cast iron staircase (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:34, 50). Owned by the National Park Service, Sandy Hook Light (NR No. 66000468), which is in the Gateway National Recreation Area, was listed in the NRHP in 1966 under Criterion A for its association with the colonial program to construct maritime navigational aids along the eastern seaboard. The lighthouse's period of significance is 1764-1799. The property was designated as an NHL in 1964 (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:34). The property is on the Sandy Hook peninsula and has had unobstructed ocean views since it was constructed. Clear sightlines out to the Atlantic Ocean are an important characteristic of Sandy Hook Light's setting and purpose as an aid to maritime navigation. It was assessed that the Projects would diminish this significant characteristic of the property and result in an adverse effect on Sandy Hook Light (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:34). As described in the Empire Wind Cumulative Historic Resources Visual Effects Analysis, Sandy Hook Light is 24.3 miles from the nearest WTG associated with the Projects and 46.1 miles from the nearest potential WTG location for other wind energy development activities. The total number of potentially visible WTGs from Sandy Hook Light is 154. Of these, 147 theoretically visible WTGs (95 percent) would be from the proposed Projects. As such, BOEM determined the Projects would incrementally add to the cumulative visual effects on Sandy Hook Light when combined with the effects of other past, present, or reasonably foreseeable future actions (BOEM 2022). N.4.1.3.13 Fort Hancock, U.S. Life Saving Station in Gateway National Recreation Area, Highlands, New Jersey (National Park Service) The property is on the Sandy Hook peninsula approximately 22.4 miles (36.3 kilometers) from the Wind Farm Development Area. Constructed in 1894, the station was one of the six original U.S. Life Saving Service stations in New Jersey. The property was designed in the Shingle style, but its railings and N-33
116	Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP framing principals exhibit Craftsman-style influences. The Life Saving Station was deactivated in 1949 and has served as a visitor center for the Gateway National Recreation Area since 1974 (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:35, 50). Owned by the National Park Service, Fort Hancock, U.S. Life Saving Station (National Register No. 81000080), which is in the Gateway National Recreation Area, was listed in the NRHP in 1981 under Criterion A for its association with the earliest federally sponsored efforts to save life and property from coastal shipwrecks, and under Criterion C as an example of late-nineteenth-century New Jersey coastal utilitarian architecture. The property's period of significance is 1894-1949 (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:35). The property is on the Sandy Hook peninsula and has had unobstructed ocean views since it was constructed. Clear sightlines out to the Atlantic Ocean are an important characteristic of Fort Hancock, U.S. Life Saving Station's setting and purpose as life-saving station. It was assessed that the Projects would diminish this significant characteristic of the property and result in an adverse effect on Fort Hancock, U.S. Life Saving Station (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:35). As described in the Empire Wind Cumulative Historic Resources Visual Effects Analysis, Fort Hancock, U.S. Life Saving Station is 22.6 miles from the nearest WTG associated with the Projects and 35.3 miles from the nearest potential WTG location for other wind energy development activities. The total number of potentially visible WTGs from Fort Hancock, U.S. Life Saving Station is 106. Of these, 106 theoretically visible WTGs (100 percent) would be from the proposed Projects. As such, BOEM determined the Projects would incrementally add to the cumulative visual effects on Fort Hancock, U.S. Life Saving Station when combined with the effects of other past, present, or reasonably foreseeable future actions (BOEM 2022). N.4.1.3.14 Allenhurst Residential Historic District, Allenhurst, New Jersey The property is in eastern Monmouth County, New Jersey and is approximately 24.3 miles (39.1 kilometers) from the Wind Farm Development Area. The Allenhurst Residential Historic District is composed of 290 residences, 202 outbuildings, a municipal building, a church, a restaurant, and the Allenhurst Beach Complex. Most of the buildings within the district were constructed around the turn of the twentieth century by the Coast Land Improvement Company. Architectural styles including Tudor Revival, Gothic Revival, Queen Anne, Prairie, Mission, Shingle, and Craftsman are exhibited within the district (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:45, 51). The Allenhurst Residential Historic District (NR No. 10000353) is listed in the NRHP under Criterion C as an example of late nineteenth and early twentieth century community development that employs a number of the popular architectural styles of this period. The district's period of significance is 1895- 1930 (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:45). This property is on the eastern shoreline of Monmouth County and was constructed in part to provide residents with ocean access and views. The introduction of the Projects within the ocean viewshed of the district would likely alter this relationship between the Atlantic Ocean and the planned community and diminish the characteristics for which the historic district is significant. Therefore, it was assessed that the Projects would have an adverse effect on the Allenhurst Residential Historic District (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:45). As described in the Empire Wind Cumulative Historic Resources Visual Effects Analysis, the Allenhurst Residential District is 25.0 miles from the nearest WTG associated with the Projects and 39.0 miles from the nearest potential WTG location for other wind energy development activities. The total number of potentially visible WTGs from the Allenhurst Residential District is 128. Of these, 114 theoretically N-34
117	Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP visible WTGs (90 percent) would be from the proposed Projects. As such, BOEM determined the Projects would incrementally add to the cumulative visual effects on the Allenhurst Residential District when combined with the effects of other past, present, or reasonably foreseeable future actions (BOEM 2022). N.4.1.3.15 Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association Historic District, Ocean Grove, New Jersey The property is in Ocean Grove in western Monmouth County, New Jersey and is approximately 25.4 miles (40.9 kilometers) from the Wind Farm Development Area. The community of Ocean Grove was established in 1870 by the Methodist Church as a seaside resort, religious assembly, and spiritual haven for congregants. The Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association Historic District is composed of almost 1,000 buildings, with nearly three-quarters designed in the Stick style. All properties within the district are owned by the Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:46, 51). The Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association Historic District (NR No. 76001170) was listed in the NRHP in 1976 under Criterion A for its association with the religious camp as a planned community, and under Criterion C for its Stick-style architecture and the nineteenth century acoustical science and ventilation system in its Great Auditorium. The district's period of significance is 1870-1894 (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:46). This property is on eastern shoreline of Monmouth County and was constructed in part to provide residents with ocean access and views. The introduction of the Projects within the ocean viewshed of the district would likely alter this relationship between the Atlantic Ocean and the planned community and diminish the characteristics for which the historic district is significant. Therefore, it was assessed that the Projects would have an adverse effect on the Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association Historic District (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:46). As described in the Empire Wind Cumulative Historic Resources Visual Effects Analysis, the Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association Historic District is 25.5 miles from the nearest WTG associated with the Projects and 37.4 miles from the nearest potential WTG location for other wind energy development activities. The total number of potentially visible WTGs from the Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association Historic District is 141. Of these, 115 theoretically visible WTGs (82 percent) would be from the proposed Projects. As such, BOEM determined the Projects would incrementally add to the cumulative visual effects on the Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association Historic District when combined with the effects of other past, present, or reasonably foreseeable future actions (BOEM 2022). N.4.1.3.16 Water Witch (Monmouth Hills) Historic District, Middleton, New Jersey The property is inland on the Atlantic Highlands in Monmouth County, New Jersey and is approximately 22.8 miles (36.6 kilometers) from the Wind Farm Development Area. The Water Witch Club Historic District contains what was known historically as the Water Witch Club, a late nineteenth century and early twentieth century romantically designed summer community. The district consists of a clubhouse/ casino; 21 summer cottages, all constructed between 1896 and 1909; and 28 contributing structures. These 28 contributing structures consist of the narrow gravel roadway system and a series of peanut stone (a distinctive local sandstone composite) structures including gateposts, retaining walls, walks, gutters, and staircases (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:47, 51; Tomkins 2004:3). The Water Witch (Monmouth Hills) Historic District (NR No. 04000147) was listed in the NRHP in 2004 under Criterion A for its association with the development of the Atlantic Highlands as a professional- class summer community during the late nineteenth and early twentieth century; under Criterion B for its association with the life of Frederick P. Hill, a significant architect who designed and resided in N-35
118	Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP Monmouth Hills; and under Criterion C for its contributions to community planning, construction techniques, and architecture as a designed community featuring winding gravel roads, vegetated lots, and hills offering scenic views of the ocean. The district's period of significance is 1895-1930 (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:47; Tomkins 2004:26). This property is on the eastern shoreline of Monmouth County and was constructed in part to provide residents with picturesque ocean views. The introduction of the Projects within the ocean viewshed of the district would likely alter this relationship between the Atlantic Ocean and the planned community and diminish the characteristics for which the historic district is significant. Therefore, it was assessed that the Projects would have an adverse effect on the Water Witch (Monmouth Hills) Historic District (COP Volume 3, Appendix Z; Empire 2022:47). As described in the Empire Wind Cumulative Historic Resources Visual Effects Analysis, the Water Witch (Monmouth Hills) Historic District is 22.9 miles from the nearest WTG associated with the Projects and 43.8 miles from the nearest potential WTG location for other wind energy development activities. The total number of potentially visible WTGs from Water Witch (Monmouth Hills) Historic District is 239. Of these, 147 theoretically visible WTGs (62 percent) would be from the proposed Projects. As such, BOEM determined the Projects would incrementally add to the cumulative visual effects on the Water Witch (Monmouth Hills) Historic District when combined with the effects of other past, present, or reasonably foreseeable future actions (BOEM 2022). N.4.2 Connected Action This section assesses effects from the connected action on historic properties in the APE for the Empire Wind undertaking. Effects were previously assessed for the SBMT port infrastructure project; New York SHPO notified USACE of its concurrence on a finding of No Adverse Effect on historic properties from SBMT project activities (Attachment E, New York SHPO Letter of Concurrence on Finding of No Adverse Effect on Historic Properties from South Brooklyn Marine Terminal Port Infrastructure Upgrades). BOEM has reviewed that prior assessment and agrees with the USACE findings as follows. Cultural resource investigations completed for the connected action identified no historic properties within the terrestrial APE (NYCEDC 2021). Land where ground disturbance associated with SBMT port improvement activities are proposed has been determined to have been previously disturbed or altered. As such, BOEM finds no historic properties affected from the connected action in the terrestrial APE. Cultural resource investigations completed for the connected action identified no historic properties within the marine APE (NYCEDC 2021). Submerged areas where dredging associated with SBMT port improvement activities are proposed has been determined to have been previously disturbed or altered. As such, BOEM finds no historic properties affected from the connected action in the marine APE. Review of the visual APE for the connected action identified five architectural resources that are historic properties: the Bush Terminal Historic District, the American Can Company building, Storehouse Number 2 (of the U.S. Navy Fleet Supply Base), the Gowanus Expressway Viaduct, and Intermediate School 136. NYCEDC (2021) recommended that the SBMT project would have no effect on three of these historic properties-the American Can Company building, the Gowanus Expressway Viaduct, and Intermediate School 136-because there would be no physical impact on these properties from the SBMT improvements and views from these properties to the SBMT are obstructed by intervening development. NYCEDC (2021) recommended that the SBMT project would have no adverse effect on two historic properties-the Bush Terminal Historic District and Storehouse Number 2. The port improvement activities would not physically affect these two properties and, while the SBMT improvements would be visible from the Bush Terminal Historic District and Storehouse Number 2, the visual alterations are consistent with and sustain the setting of the historic properties as part of a working waterfront. N-36
119	Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP As such, BOEM finds No Adverse Effect on historic properties in the APE from the connected action. N.4.3 Summary of Adversely Affected Historic Properties N.4.3.1. Proposed Action N.4.3.1.1 Adverse Effects on Historic Properties in the Marine APE The Projects would have adverse effects on 52 known historic properties within the marine APE: 30 marine archaeological resources and 22 ancient submerged landforms. Empire intends to prioritize avoidance of the 30 marine archaeological resources (Targets 01-30) and their associated recommended avoidance buffers. Empire's preferred method for addressing potential effects on ancient submerged landforms (Targets 31-52) is through avoidance. Avoidance of a historic property would result in no effect on the historic property. However, development of the final Project design is ongoing, and it is currently unclear whether Empire would be able to avoid adverse effects. Additionally, based upon the current layout for the Proposed Action presented in the COP, Targets 31-36 and 40-50 are not avoidable in their entirety. Therefore, BOEM has determined the undertaking would have adverse effects on historic properties within the marine APE. N.4.3.1.2 Adverse Effects on Historic Properties in the Terrestrial APE The Projects have been designed to avoid adverse effects on terrestrial archaeological resources by siting onshore Project components within previously disturbed areas and existing road right-of-way to the extent practicable. No known historic properties were identified within the terrestrial APE. Therefore, BOEM finds no effect on known terrestrial archaeological historic properties. Empire is considering archaeological monitoring at seven locations for EW 2 based on the presence of upland terrain that may contain intact native soils below the fill cap and were evaluated to be sensitive for the presence of precontact period archaeological resources. If archaeological resources or human remains are identified during Project construction, operations, or decommissioning, the onsite construction supervisor would stop work immediately and follow the protocols outlined in the Unanticipated Discoveries Plan. Terrestrial archaeological resources discovered during construction could be historic properties eligible for the NRHP and may experience adverse effects from the undertaking. N.4.3.1.3 Adverse Effects on Historic Properties in the Visual APE Based on the information BOEM has available from the studies conducted to identify historic properties within the visual APE of the Projects and the assessment of effects upon those properties determined in consultation with the consulting parties, BOEM has found that the Projects would have a direct adverse visual effect on: cent West Bank Light Station in Staten Island, New York cent Breezy Point Surf Club Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit) in Rockaway, Queens, New York cent Silver Gull Beach Club Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit) in Rockaway, Queens, New York cent Jacob Riis Park Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit) in Rockaway, Queens, New York cent Jones Beach State Park, Parkway and Causeway System, Hempstead/Oyster Bay, New York cent Robert Moses State Park in Babylon/Islip, New York N-37
120	"Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP cent Fire Island Lighthouse in Islip, New York cent Fire Island Light Station Historic District in Islip, New York cent Carrington House in Brook Haven, New York cent Point O'Woods Historic District in Islip, New York cent Romer Shoal Light Station in Lower New York Bay, New Jersey cent Sandy Hook Light, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit) in Middleton, New Jersey cent Fort Hancock, U.S. Life Saving Station, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service unit) in Highlands, New Jersey cent Allenhurst Residential Historic District in Allenhurst, New Jersey cent Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association District in Ocean Grove, New Jersey cent Water Witch (Monmouth Hills) Historic District in Middleton, New Jersey The undertaking would affect the character of the properties' settings that contributes to their historic significance by introducing visual elements that are out of character with the historic setting of the properties. BOEM did, however, determine that, due to the distance and open viewshed, the integrity of the properties would not be so diminished as to disqualify any of them for NRHP eligibility. The adverse effects on the viewshed of the above-ground historic properties would occupy the space for approximately 35 years, but they are unavoidable for reasons discussed in Assessment of Effects on Historic Properties in the Visual APE (Section N.4.1.3). This application of the criteria of adverse effect and determination that the effects are direct are based on pertinent NRHP bulletins, subsequent clarification and guidance by the National Park Service and ACHP, and other documentation, including professionally prepared viewshed assessments and computer-simulated photographs. N.4.3.2. Connected Action No known historic properties were identified within the terrestrial APE or the marine APE for the connected action. Therefore, BOEM finds the SBMT project would have no historic properties affected. Within the visual APE, the SBMT project would have no effect on three historic properties and no adverse effect on two historic properties. BOEM agrees with USACE's finding of No Adverse Effect on historic properties from the SBMT port infrastructure improvement project, which received New York SHPO concurrence (Attachment E, New York SHPO Letter of Concurrence on Finding of No Adverse Effect on Historic Properties from South Brooklyn Marine Terminal Port Infrastructure Upgrades). As such, BOEM finds No Adverse Effect on historic properties in the APE from the connected action. N.5. National Historic Landmarks and the NHPA Section 106 Process The National Park Service, which administers the NHL program for the Secretary of the Interior, describes NHLs and requirements for NHLs as follows: National Historic Landmarks (NHL) are designated by the Secretary under the authority of the Historic Sites Act of 1935, which authorizes the Secretary to identify historic and archaeological sites, buildings, and objects which ""possess exceptional value as commemorating or illustrating the history of the United States"" Section 110(f) of the NHPA requires that Federal agencies exercise a higher standard of care when considering undertakings that may directly and N-38"
121	"Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP adversely affect NHLs. The law requires that agencies, ""to the maximum extent possible, undertake such planning and actions as may be necessary to minimize harm to such landmark."" In those cases when an agency's undertaking directly and adversely affects an NHL, or when Federal permits, licenses, grants, and other programs and projects under its jurisdiction or carried out by a state or local government pursuant to a Federal delegation or approval so affect an NHL, the agency should consider all prudent and feasible alternatives to avoid an adverse effect on the NHL. NHPA Section 110(f) applies specifically to NHLs.