Federal Preservation Institute, Section 110 of the National Historic Preservation Act, The Secretary of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines for Federal Agency Historic Preservation Programs Pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act. Available: https://www.nps.gov/fpi/Section110.html. New York City Economic Development Corporation (NYCEDC). 2021. South Brooklyn Marine Terminal Port Infrastructure Improvement Project, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers/New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) Joint Permit Application. USACE Pre- Application # NAN-2021-01201-EMI. December. Tetra Tech. 2021a. Empire Offshore Wind: Empire Wind Project (EW 1 and EW 2) EW 2 Onshore Substation C Characterization Report. October. Boston, MA. Prepared for Empire Offshore Wind, LLC, Stamford, CT. Tetra Tech. 2021b. Empire Offshore Wind: Empire Wind Project (EW1 and EW2), Proposed Avoidance, Minimization and Mitigation to Support BOEM Section 106 Consultation. December. Boston, MA. Prepared for Empire Offshore Wind, LLC, Stamford, CT. Tetra Tech. 2022. Empire Offshore Wind: Empire Wind Project (EW1 and EW2), Section 106 Phased Identification Plan. December. Boston, MA. Prepared for Empire Offshore Wind, LLC, Stamford, CT. Tomkins, Michael. 2004. Water Witch Club Historic District National Register of Historic Places Registration Form. March 12. NPS Ref. No. 04000147. N-45
128	Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP This page intentionally left blank. N-46
129	Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP ATTACHMENT A MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
130	Empire Offshore Wind Appendix N Draft Environmental Impact Statement Finding of Adverse Effect for Empire Wind COP This page intentionally left blank. 131	DRAFT MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT AMONG THE BUREAU OF OCEAN ENERGY MANAGEMENT, THE NEW JERSEY STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER, THE NEW YORK STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER, AND THE ADVISORY COUNCIL ON HISTORIC PRESERVATION REGARDING THE EMPIRE WIND OFFSHORE WIND FARM PROJECTS WHEREAS, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) plans to authorize construction and operation of the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Projects (Projects), which consist of the EW 1 and EW 2, pursuant to Section 8(p)(1)(C) of the Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1337(p)(1)(C)), as amended by the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (Public Law No. 109-58) and in accordance with Renewable Energy Regulations at 30 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 585; and WHEREAS, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management determined that the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Projects constitute an undertaking subject to Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA), as amended (54 USC 306108), and the implementing regulations (36 CFR 800), and consistent with the Programmatic Agreement (PA) regarding the review of Outer Continental Shelf renewable energy activities offshore New Jersey and New York (Programmatic Agreement Among The U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, The State Historic Preservation Officers of New Jersey and New York, The Shinnecock Indian Nation, and The Advisory Council on Historic Preservation Regarding Review of Outer Continental Shelf Renewable Energy Activities Offshore New Jersey and New York Under Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act); and WHEREAS, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management plans to approve with conditions the Construction and Operations Plan (COP) submitted by Empire Offshore Wind, LLC (Empire); and WHEREAS, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management determined the construction, operation, maintenance, and eventual decommissioning of the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Projects, planned for up to 147 offshore Wind Turbine Generators (WTGs), up to two offshore substations, three onshore substations, offshore and onshore export cables, could potentially adversely affect historic properties as defined under 36 CFR 800.16(l); and WHEREAS, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management is preparing an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Projects pursuant to the National Environmental Policy Act (42 USC 4321 et seq.) (NEPA) and elected to use the National Environmental Policy Act substitution process with the Section 106 consultation pursuant to 36 CFR 800.8(c); and WHEREAS, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management notified in advance the New Jersey State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO), New York State Historic Preservation Officer, and the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP) on April 29, 2021 of the decision to use National Environmental Policy Act substitution and followed the standards for developing environmental documents to comply with the Section 106 consultation for the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project pursuant to 36 CFR 800.8(c), and the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation responded with acknowledgement on May 12, 2021; and WHEREAS, in accordance with 36 CFR 800.3, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management invited New Jersey State Historic Preservation Officer and New York State Historic Preservation Officer to consult on the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project on April 29, 2021, and New Jersey State Historic Preservation Officer accepted on May 26, 2021, and New York State Historic Preservation Officer accepted on May 5, 2021; and WHEREAS, in accordance with 36 CFR 800.3, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management invited the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation to consult on the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project on April 29, 2021, and the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation accepted on May 12, 2021; and WHEREAS, the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project is within a commercial lease area subject to the previous NHPA Section 106 review by the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management regarding the issuance of the commercial lease and approval of site assessment activities. Both Section 106 reviews for the lease issuance and the approval of the site assessment plan were conducted pursuant to the Programmatic Agreement and concluded with No Historic Properties Affected on December 16, 2016. 1
132	WHEREAS, consistent with 36 CFR 800.16(d) and the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management's Guidelines for Providing Archaeological and Historic Property Information Pursuant to 30 CFR Part 585 (May 27, 2020), the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management defined the area of potential effects (APE) for the undertaking as the depth and breadth of the seabed potentially impacted by any bottom-disturbing activities, constituting the marine archaeological resources portion of the area of potential effects (marine APE); the depth and breadth of terrestrial areas potentially impacted by any ground disturbing activities, constituting the terrestrial archaeological resources portion of the area of potential effects (terrestrial APE); the viewshed from which offshore or onshore renewable energy structures would be visible, constituting the viewshed portion of the area of potential effects (viewshed APE); and any temporary or permanent construction or staging areas that may fall into any of the aforementioned offshore or onshore portions of the area of potential effects (see Attachment 1 area of potential effects Maps); and WHEREAS, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management identified 15 historic districts and 25 aboveground historic properties in the offshore Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project components' portion of the viewshed area of potential effects and one historic district and three historic properties in the onshore Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project components' portion of the viewshed area of potential effects; thirty submerged historic properties and twenty-two ancient submerged landforms and features (ASLFs) in the marine area of potential effects; and no historic properties in the terrestrial area of potential effects; and WHEREAS, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management identified three National Historic Landmarks (NHLs) in the offshore Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project components' portion of the viewshed area of potential effects, Cyclone Roller Coaster, Fort Hancock and Sandy Hook Proving Ground Historic District, and Sandy Hook Light and one National Historic Landmarks is the onshore Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project components' portion of the viewshed area of potential effects, Green-Wood Cemetery; and WHEREAS, within the range of Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project alternatives analyzed in the Environmental Impact Statement, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management determined that eight historic districts and eight individual historic properties would be subject to visual adverse effects from Wind Turbine Generators, thirty submerged cultural properties (Targets 01-30) may be potentially adversely affected by physical disturbance from export cable construction within the avoidance buffers of these resources, twenty-two ancient submerged landforms and features may be potentially adversely affected by physical disturbance in the lease area and from export cable construction, and no historic properties in the terrestrial area of potential effects would be adversely affected with implementation of the undertaking; and WHEREAS, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management determined there would be no visual adverse effect to two of the three National Historic Landmarks in the offshore viewshed area of potential effects, Cyclone Roller Coaster and Fort Hancock and Sandy Hook Proving Ground Historic District, because ocean views are not character-defining features of these historic properties, and the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management determined there would be no visual adverse effect to the one National Historic Landmarks in the onshore viewshed area of potential effects, Green-Wood Cemetery, because proposed onshore substation and Operation & Maintenance Base would be partially visible from one of the highest topographic points of the cemetery but would be a minor middleground element in the built environment of the Gowanus Bay shoreline, and the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management determined there would be an visual adverse effect to one National Historic Landmarks in the offshore viewshed area of potential effects, Sandy Hook Light; and WHEREAS, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management determined that the implementation of the avoidance measures identified in this Memorandum of Agreement will avoid adverse effects to seven historic districts and 17 aboveground historic properties in the offshore viewshed area of potential effects, to one historic district and three historic properties in the onshore viewshed area of potential effects; and WHEREAS, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management determined all of the ancient submerged landforms and features identified in the marine area of potential effects are eligible for the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) under Criteria A and D and determined, under each of the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project alternatives analyzed in the Environmental Impact Statement, that the undertaking will adversely affect the following 22 ancient submerged landforms and features: Targets 31 through 52; and WHEREAS, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management determined the undertaking will adversely affect the all 30 marine archaeological resources identified in the marine area of potential effects: Targets 1 through 30; and 2
133	WHEREAS, under each of the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project alternatives analyzed in the Environmental Impact Statement, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management determined the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project would visually adversely affect these three historic districts and three aboveground historic properties in New Jersey: Allenhurst Residential Historic District, Allenhurst; Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association District, Ocean Grove; Water Witch (Monmouth Hills) Historic District, Middleton; Romer Shoal Light, Lower New York Bay; Sandy Hook Light, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Parks Service unit), Middleton, Fort Hancock, U.S. Life Saving Station in Gateway National Recreation Area (National Park Service), Highlands; and five historic districts and five aboveground historic properties in New York: Breezy Point Surf Club Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Parks Service unit), Rockaway, Queens, New York; Silver Gull Beach Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Parks Service unit), Rockaway; Jacob Riis Park Historic District, Gateway National Recreation Area (National Parks Service unit) Rockaway; Fire Island Lighthouse and Historic District, Fire Island National Seashore (National Parks Service unit), Islip; Point of O'Woods Historic District, Islip; West Bank Light Station, Staten Island; Jones Beach State Park, Parkway and Causeway System, Hempstead/Oyster Bay; Robert Moses State Park, Babylon; Fire Island Lighthouse, Fire Island National Seashore (National Parks Service unit), Islip; Carrington House, Fire Island National Seashore (National Parks Service unit), Brook Haven; and WHEREAS, New Jersey State Historic Preservation Officer concurred with the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management's finding of adverse effect on [insert date of State Historic Preservation Officer's concurrence] and New York State Historic Preservation Officer concurred with the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management's finding of adverse effect on [insert date of State Historic Preservation Officer's concurrence]; and WHEREAS, throughout this document the term 'Tribe,' has the same meaning as 'Indian Tribe,' as defined at 36 CFR 800.16(m); and WHEREAS, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management invited the following federally recognized Tribes to consult on the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project: Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, Eastern Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma, Mohegan Tribe of Connecticut, Shawnee Tribe, the Narragansett Indian Tribe, and the Shinnecock Indian Nation; the Delaware Tribe of Indians, Delaware Nation, the Stockbridge-Munsee Community Band of Mohican Indians; and WHEREAS, the Delaware Tribe of Indians, Delaware Nation, the Shinnecock Indian Nation, and the Wampanoag Tribe of Gay Head (Aquinnah) accepted the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management's invitation to consult and the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management invited these Tribes to sign this Memorandum of Agreement as concurring parties; and WHEREAS, in accordance with 36 CFR 800.3, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management invited other federal agencies, state and local governments, and additional consulting parties with a demonstrated interest in the undertaking to participate in this consultation, the list of those accepting participation and declining to participate by either written response or no response to direct invitations are listed in Attachment 2; and WHEREAS, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management has consulted with Empire Offshore Wind in Empire Offshore Wind's capacity as an applicant seeking federal approval of the Construction and Operations Plan, and, because Empire Offshore Wind has responsibilities under the Memorandum of Agreement, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management has invited the applicant to be an invited signatory to this Memorandum of Agreement; and WHEREAS, construction of the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project requires a Department of the Army permit from the United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) for activities that result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into jurisdictional wetlands and/or other waters of the United States pursuant to Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, and activities occurring in or affecting navigable waters of the United States pursuant to Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act; and WHEREAS, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management invited United States Army Corps of Engineers to consult since United States Army Corps of Engineers will be issuing permits for the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1344) and Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act (33 USC 403); and 3
134	WHEREAS, the United States Army Corps of Engineers designated the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management as the Lead Federal Agency pursuant to 36 CFR 800.2(a)(2) to act on United States Army Corps of Engineers' behalf for purposes of compliance with Section 106 for the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project (in a letter dated [Month XX, 20XX], the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management invited the United States Army Corps of Engineers to sign this Memorandum of Agreement as a concurring party, and the United States Army Corps of Engineers accepted the invitation to sign this Memorandum of Agreement as a concurring party; and WHEREAS, United States Army Corps of Engineers is the Lead Federal Agency, reviewed, and authorized a separate South Brooklyn Marine Terminal Port Improvement Project in Brooklyn, New York, which includes marine upgrades at the Empire Wind 1 Operation & Maintenance facility at the South Bay Marine Terminal (SMBT), is considered a Connected Action to the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project, and also reviewed by the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management as part of this undertaking; and WHEREAS, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management notified and invited the Secretary of the Interior (represented by the National Park Service (NPS) to consult regarding the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project pursuant to the Section 106 regulations, including consideration of the potential effects to the National Historic Landmarks as required under National Historic Preservation Act Section 110(f) (54 USC 306107) and 36 CFR 800.10, the National Park Service accepted the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management's invitation to consult, and the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management invited the National Park Service to sign this Memorandum of Agreement as a concurring party; and WHEREAS, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management has consulted with the signatories, invited signatories, and consulting parties participating in the development of this Memorandum of Agreement regarding the definition of the undertaking, the delineation of the areas of potential effects, the identification and evaluation of historic properties, the assessment of potential effects to the historic properties, and on measures to avoid minimize, and mitigate adverse effects to historic properties; and WHEREAS, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management has planned and is taking action to minimize harm, as required by National Historic Preservation Act Section 110(f) at 36 CFR 800.10 to the one adversely effected National Historic Landmarks in the viewshed area of potential effects, Sandy Hook Light, as explained in the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management's 2022 Finding of Adverse Effect for the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Construction and Operations Plan (hereafter, the Finding of Effect, and dated [Month 2023]), such measures to include using non-reflective white and light gray paint on offshore structures and using navigational lighting that minimizes the visibility of the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project from this National Historic Landmarks; and WHEREAS, pursuant to 36 CFR 800.6, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management invited Empire Offshore Wind to sign as invited signatory and the consulting parties as listed in Attachment 2 to sign as concurring parties; however, the refusal of any consulting party to sign this Memorandum of Agreement or otherwise concur does not invalidate or affect the effective date of this Memorandum of Agreement, and consulting parties who choose not to sign this Memorandum of Agreement will continue to receive information if requested and have an opportunity to participate in consultation as specified in this Memorandum of Agreement; and WHEREAS, the signatories agree, consistent with 36 CFR 800.6(b)(2), that adverse effects will be resolved in the manner set forth in this Memorandum of Agreement; and WHEREAS, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management sought and considered the views of the public regarding Section 106 for the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project through the National Environmental Policy Act process by holding virtual public scoping meetings when initiating the National Environmental Policy Act and National Historic Preservation Act Section 106 review on June 30, July 8 and 13, 2021 and virtual public hearings related to the Draft Environmental Impact Statement on [Month Days], 2022; and WHEREAS, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management made the first Draft Memorandum of Agreement available to the public for review and comment from November 18, 2022, to January 17, 2022, and made an updated version of the Draft Memorandum of Agreement available to the public from [Month XX, 2022], to [Month XX, 2022], using the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management's Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project website, and the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management [did or did not receive any comments from the public]; and NOW, THEREFORE, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, the New Jersey State Historic Preservation Officer, New York State Historic Preservation Officer, and the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation agree that the undertaking shall be implemented in accordance with the following stipulations in order to take into account the effect of the undertaking on historic properties. 4
135	STIPULATIONS The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, with the assistance of Empire Offshore Wind, shall ensure that the following measures are carried out as conditions of the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management's approval of the undertaking: I. MEASURES TO AVOID ADVERSE EFFECTS TO IDENTIFIED HISTORIC PROPERTIES A. Marine area of potential effects 1. The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management will include the following avoidance measures for adverse effects within the marine area of potential effects as conditions of approval of the Empire Wind Construction and Operations Plan: i. Empire Offshore Wind will avoid known historic submerged cultural resources, such as shipwrecks and debris fields, previously identified during marine archaeological surveys by a distance of no less than 50 meters from the known extent of the resource for placement of Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project structures and when conducting seafloor-disturbing activities. ii. Empire Offshore Wind will avoid potential submerged cultural resources, such as potential shipwrecks and potentially significant debris fields previously identified during marine archaeological surveys by a distance of no less than 300 meters from the known extent of the resource, unless the buffer would preclude the installation of facilities at Empire Offshore Wind's engineered locations, but in no event would the buffer be less than 100 meters from the known extent of the resource. iii. Empire Offshore Wind will avoid ancient submerged landforms and features previously identified during marine archaeological resource assessments for the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project by a distance of no less than 50 meters from the known extent of the resource for placement of Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project structures and when conducting seafloor- disturbing activities, to the extent practicable. B. Viewshed area of potential effects 1. The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management will include the following avoidance measures for adverse effects within the viewshed area of potential effects as conditions of approval of the Empire Wind Construction and Operations Plan: i. To maintain avoidance of adverse effects to historic properties in the viewshed area of potential effects where the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management determined no adverse effects or where no effects would occur, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management will require Empire Offshore Wind to ensure Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project structures are within the design envelope, sizes, scale, locations, lighting prescriptions, and distances that were used by the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management to inform the definition of the area of potential effects for the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project and for determining effects in the Finding of Effect (see the Construction & Operations Plan: Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Project, May, 2022). II. MEASURES TO MINIMIZE ADVERSE EFFECTS TO IDENTIFIED HISTORIC PROPERTIES A. Viewshed area of potential effects 1. The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management has undertaken planning and actions to minimize adverse effects to aboveground historic properties in the viewshed area of potential effects. The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management will include these minimization measures for adverse effects within the viewshed area of potential effects as conditions of approval of the Empire Wind Construction and Operations Plan: i. Empire Offshore Wind will use uniform Wind Turbine Generator design, speed, height, and rotor diameter to reduce visual contrast and decrease visual clutter. 5
136	ii. Empire Offshore Wind will use consistent and as far apart as possible, with maximum spacing in the dominant trawl tow direction where feasible, with minimum spacing of no less than 0.65 NM (1.2 km) to decrease visual clutter, aligning Wind Turbine Generators to allow for safe transit corridors. iii. Empire Offshore Wind will apply a paint color to the Wind Turbine Generators no lighter than RAL 9010 pure white and no darker than RAL 7035 light gray to help reduce the potential visibility of the turbines against the horizon during daylight hours. iv. Empire Offshore Wind will implement an aircraft detection lighting system (ADLS) to automatically activate lights when aircraft approach the wind farm. The Wind Turbine Generators and offshore substations would be lit and marked in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration and United States Coast Guard lighting standards and consistent with the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management's Guidelines for Lighting and Marking of Structures Supporting Renewable Energy Development (April 28, 2021) to reduce light intrusion. III. MEASURES TO MITIGATE ADVERSE EFFECTS TO IDENTIFIED HISTORIC PROPERTIES A. Marine area of potential effects 1. Empire Offshore Wind will encroach on the avoidance buffers for thirty (30) marine archaeological resources (Targets 1-30). To resolve the adverse effects to these resources, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management will include the conditions of approval of the Empire Wind Offshore Wind Farm Construction and Operations Plan and require Empire Offshore Wind to fulfill the following as mitigation measures before construction. The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management will require Empire Offshore Wind to develop a treatment plan with more mitigation measures details and consultation specificity if New Jersey State Historic Preservation Officer, New York State Historic Preservation Officer, the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, and the consulting parties agree to these proposed mitigation measures for the potentially adversely affected historic properties: i. Phase IB identification/Phase II National Register of Historic Places evaluation and site boundary delineation, including: a. Additional high-resolution geophysical (HRG) survey to further refine target boundaries (i.e. increased data density for the reassessment of target and dive planning). b. Identification, significance evaluation, and delineation of the target sources accomplished with a remotely operated vehicle or, subject to satisfaction of internal health safety and environment (HSE) requirements and protocols, surface-supplied diver investigations, depending upon high-resolution geophysical survey characteristics. This could include limited investigation. c. As part of this mitigation measure, the applicant and contractors will continue archival research in state and/or federal repositories. ii. Revisit avoidance recommendation and adjust avoidance buffer, if warranted, based on Phase IB/Phase II results and allow the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management to make a final determination if the avoidance buffers need to be adjusted iii. Coordinate with the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management regarding recommended National Register of Historic Places eligibility, allow the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management to make the final determination, and consult further with interested Consulting Parties [these consulting parties will be identified through future consultation on this Memorandum of Agreement and associated treatment plan], if the properties are determined eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places. 6
137	iv. If National Register of Historic Places-eligible, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, with the assistance of Empire Offshore Wind, will consult with the New Jersey State Historic Preservation Officer, the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, and interested Consulting Parties [these consulting parties will be identified through future consultation on this Memorandum of Agreement and associated treatment plan] to develop a limited data recovery research design and alternative mitigation. v. Subject to the satisfaction of internal health safety and environment requirements and protocols, Phase III data recovery will be accomplished through surface-supplied diver excavation. Level of effort dependent on consultation but could include: a. Limited excavation and data recovery of selected sections of the archaeological site. b. Recovery and conservation of select diagnostic artifacts for potential use in an exhibit or other public outreach program. This would be based on the opportunity determined during excavation and mapping. c. Alternative mitigation to offset full data recovery (offsite). Examples include a robust archival research project or high-resolution geophysical survey designed to locate vessel loss.